

=== PAGE 1 ===

           
 
Page | 1   
     
  
 
(Established under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956) 
Placed under Category ‘A’ by MHRD, GoI | Accredited with ‘A+’      
Grade by NAAC 
 
Regulations and Curriculum for 
Bachelor of Technology (B.Tech.) 
in 
Artificial Intelligence and Data 
Science  
Version 2025.01 
Regulations and Curriculum for 
Bachelor of Technology (B.Tech.) 
in 
Artificial Intelligence and Data Science 
Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning 
Computer and Communication Engineering 
Computer Science and Engineering 
Information Science and  Engineering 
Robotics and Artificial Intelligence 
Computer Science and Engineering (Cyber Security) 
Computer Science and Business Systems 
 
 
  Version 2026.01 

=== PAGE 2 ===

           
 
Page | 2   
 
 
 
VISION 
 
To build a humane society through excellence in education and healthcare 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MISSION 
 
To develop 
Nitte (Deemed to be University) 
As a center of excellence imparting quality education, 
Generating competent, skilled manpower to face the scientific and social 
challenges with a high degree of credibility, integrity, 
ethical standards and social concern 
 
 
 
 
  

=== PAGE 3 ===

           
 
Page | 3   
 
Regulations and Curriculum for  
 
 
Bachelor of Technology (B. Tech.) 
IN 
Artificial Intelligence and Data Science 
Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning 
Computer and Communication Engineering 
Computer Science and Engineering 
Information Science and Engineering 
Robotics and Artificial Intelligence 
Computer Science and Engineering (Cyber Security) 
Computer Science and Business Systems 
 
 
 Choice Based Credit System (CBCS) 
Effective for the batch admitted during 
AY 2026-27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  

=== PAGE 4 ===

           
 
Page | 4   
 
 
 
Regulations and Curriculum 
B.Tech. Degree Programs 
Choice based Credit System 
(CBCS) 
  
 
 
Effective for the Batch admitted during   
Academic Year 
2026-27 
and onwards 
 
 
 
 
   Curriculum for Acquiring Professional Skills (CAPS) 
 
With Scheme of Teaching & Examination 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 5 ===

           
 
Page | 5   
 
 
 
 
REGULATIONS: 2026 -27 
 
 
COMMON TO ALL 
B.Tech. DEGREE PROGRAMS 
CHOICE BASED CREDIT SYSTEM 
(CBCS) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version 2026.01 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 6 ===

           
 
Page | 6   
 
 
Choice Based Credit System (CBCS) 
1. Choice for the selection of courses during each semester. 
2. Choice in planning the academic activities by selecting desired number of courses per 
semester. 
3. Balanced curriculum with engineering, science, humanities, and management courses. 
4. Project based learning (PBL), which focuses on experiential learning. 
5. Opportunities to study inter-disciplinary courses. 
6. Enabling slow learners by offering important courses in all semesters. 
7. Optional Summer semester 
8. Opportunity to get associated in research projects to acquire research experience.  
9. Value addition with Honors / Minor credentials. 
 
 
 
Curriculum for Acquiring Professional Skills (CAPS) 
1. Practicing outcome-based education (OBE) where courses made student-centric rather than 
teacher-centric. 
2. Provisions for courses integrated with Lab/ PBL component. 
3. Focus on Experiential Learning. 
4. Ability Enhancement and Skill Development Courses as per National Education Policy 
(NEP) 2020. 
5. Focus on Industry Internship and Research Internship. 
6. Students to work on real world/interdisciplinary problems in major project. 
7. Importance is given to creativity, innovation, and development of entrepreneurship skills. 
 
  

=== PAGE 7 ===

           
 
Page | 7   
 
 
 
 
Off -Campus Centre, Nitte 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 Off -Campus Centre, Bangalore 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
& 

=== PAGE 8 ===

           
 
Page | 8   
Key Information 
Program Title Bachelor of Technology Abbreviated as  
     B.Tech. Artificial Intelligence and Data Science 
     B.Tech. Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning 
       B.Tech. Computer and Communication Engineering 
     B.Tech. Computer Science and Engineering 
     B.Tech. Information Science and Engineering 
     B.Tech. Robotics and Artificial Intelligence 
     B.Tech. Computer Science and Engineering (Cyber Security) 
     B.Tech. Computer Science and Business Systems 
Short Description Four-year, eight semester Cho ice Based Credit System (CBCS) type 
of Undergraduate Engineering Degree Program with English as 
medium of instruction. 
Revision version 2026.01 
These regulations may be modified from time to time as mandated by 
the policies of the University. Revisions are to be recommended by 
the Board of Studies for 
● Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, Artificial Intelligence 
and Machine Learning, Computer and Communication 
Engineering, Computer Science and Engineering, Information 
Science and Engineering, Robotics and Artificial Intelligence, 
Computer Science and Engineering (Cyber Security), 
Computer Science and Business Systems  
● Humanities 
● Mathematics 
● Science 
● Management 
and further approved by the Academic Council. 
Effective from 01-08-2026 
Approvals ● Approved in the 61 st Academic Council meeting of NITTE 
(Deemed to be University), held on 13.06.2025 and vide 
Notification of Registrar, N(DU) Ref: N(DU)/REG/A2024 -
25/1395 dated 02-07-2025. 
● Approved in the 65 th Academic Council meeting of NITTE 
(Deemed to be University), held on 07.05.2026 and vide 
Notification of Registrar, N(DU) Ref: N(DU)/REG/AC/2025-
26/1096 dated 30.5.2026 
Program offered 
at 
1. NMAM Institute of Technology, 
N(DU) Off -Campus Centre, Nitte, 574110, Karkala Taluk 
2. Nitte Meenakshi Institute of Technology 
N(DU) Off -Campus Centre, Bangalore 
            P.B.No.6429, Yelahanka, Bangalore - 560064 
Grievance and 
dispute resolution 
All disputes arising from this set of regulations shall be addressed to the 
Executive Council. The decision of the Executive Council is final and 
binding on all parties concerned. Further, any legal disputes arising out of 
this set of regulations shall be limited to jurisdiction of Courts of Mangalore 
only. 

=== PAGE 9 ===

           
 
Page | 9   
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 1 
2. ELIGIBILITY FOR ADMISSION 2 
3. PROGRAM PATHS, EXIT OPTIONS, AND DURATION OF THE B. TECH. PROGRAM 3 
4. DEGREE PROGRAMS 5 
5. CREDIT SYSTEM 5 
6. REGISTRATION 7 
7. ADD/DROP/AUDIT OPTIONS 8 
8. PROGRAM STRUCTURE 9 
9. ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENT 15 
10. WITHDRAWAL FROM THE PROGRAM 16 
11. EVALUATION SYSTEM 16 
12. EVALUATION OF PERFORMANCE 22 
13. COMMUNICATION OF GRADES 23 
14. REQUIREMENTS FOR VERTICAL PROGRESSION 23 
15. AWARD OF CLASS 23 
16. APPEAL FOR REVIEW OF GRADES 24 
17. AWARD OF DEGREE 24 
18. GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS AND CONVOCATION 28 
19. AWARD OF PRIZES, MEDALS, CLASS & RANKS 28 
20. CONDUCT AND DISCIPLINE 29 
21. Pursuing Two Academic Programs 30 
APPENDIX - A 31 
APPENDIX-B 35 
https://www.theglobalcitizensinitiative.org/the-rights-and-responsibilities-of-global-citizenship/ 94 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 10 ===

           
 
Page | 10   
 
 
PREAMBLE 
 
Nitte Mahalinga Adyanthaya Memorial Institute of Technology (NMAMIT), Nitte, established 
in 1986 and recognized by the All -India Council for Technical Education, New Delhi, is now a 
constituent college of Nitte (Deemed to be University), Mangaluru, since June 2022. Rank band 
151-200 in the National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF) 2024 by the Ministry of 
Education, Government of India, the College has been placed under ‘Platinum’ category for 
having high industry linkages by the AICTE-CII Survey of Industry-Linked Technical Institutes 
2020. NMAMIT, the off-campus centre of Nitte DU located at Nitte in Karkala Taluk, has active 
collaborations with several international universities and organizations for faculty and student 
exchanges, research, internships and placements. 
 
Nitte Meenakshi Institute of Technology (NMIT), Bangalore, established in 2001 and recognized 
by the All -India Council for Technical Education, New Delhi, is now a constituent college of 
Nitte (Deemed to be University), Mangaluru, since Octob er 2024. NMIT is Ranked within the 
rank band 101 -150, in the National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF) - 2024 by the 
Ministry of Education, Government of India. Also, NMIT is accredited with ‘A+’ Grade by 
NAAC and Platinum Grade by AICTE-CII Survey of Industry-Linked Technical Institutes 2020. 
NMIT, the off -campus centre of Nitte Deemed to be University is located at Yelahanka, 
Bangalore. 
 
NMAMIT: 
The Institute offers UG engineering program in fourteen disciplines; Artificial Intelligence & 
Machine Learning (AIM), Artificial Intelligence & Data Science (AID), Biotechnology (BTY), 
Civil Engineering(CIV), Computer & Communication Engineering (CCE), Computer Science & 
Engineering(CSE),Computer Science (Cyber Security)(CYB), Electrical & Electronics 
Engineering (EEE), Electronics & Communication Engineering (ECE), Electronics (VLSI 
Design & Technology) (VDT), Electronics & Communication Engineering (ACT), Information 
Science & Engineering (ISE) , Mechanical Engineering(MEC) and Robotics & Artificial 
Intelligence (RAI). Out of these programs, seven UG programs i.e., BTY, CIV, CSE, EEE, ECE, 
ISE and MEC are accredited by NBA, New Delhi under Tier - I category. The institute also offers 
PG program M.Tech. in five disciplines namely Computer Science & Engineering , Cyber 
Security, Mechatronics, Structural Engineering and VLSI Design & Embedded Systems as well 
as MCA program. All the departments have qualified research guides for students interested in 
taking up research work leading to Ph.D. 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 11 ===

           
 
Page | 11   
 
 
NMIT: 
The Institute offers UG engineering program in twelve disciplines; Artificial Intelligence & Data 
Science, Artificial Intelligence & Machine Learning, Aeronautical Engineering(AER), Civil 
Engineering, Computer Science & Business Systems(CBS), Computer Science & Engin eering, 
Electrical & Electronics Engineering, Electronics & Communication Engineering, Electronics 
Engineering (VLSI Design & Technology), Information Science & Engineering, Mechanical 
Engineering and  Robotics and Artificial Intelligence. Out of these programs, seven UG programs 
i.e., AER, CIV, CSE, EEE, ECE, ISE and MEC are accredited by NBA, New Delhi under Tier - 
I category. The institute also offers PG program M.Tech. in four disciplines namely Electric 
Vehicle Technology, Structural Engineering, Defence Technology and Robotics & AI as well as 
MCA and MBA program. All the departments have qualified research guides for students 
interested in taking up research work leading to Ph.D. 
 
Curriculum: Engineering Programs 
The curriculum is jointly approved by m embers of the Board of Studies (BoS) and Academic 
Council drawn from academia, Industry, Alumni, and working professionals from Industry, and 
has been designed to integrate hands-on practical training with the concepts of theory courses to 
enhance the learning experience. 
 
The Curriculum focuses on students Acquiring Professional Skills (CAPS) through rigorous 
theoretical training using innovations in pedagogy, experiential learning, active learning, 
collaborative learning, critical thinking, project planning, Project Based Learning (PBL), Ability 
enhancement courses for skill -building, effective communication, professional practice, 
creativity & innovation and developing entrepreneurial skills. 
 
The focus of the Institution is to impart Quality Education to  generate competent, Skilled, and 
Humane Manpower to face emerging Scientific, Technological, Managerial and Social 
Challenges with Credibility, Integrity, Ethics, and Social Concern. 
 
In the present scenario, students wish to make plans for a bright futur e. However, student 
aspirations and industry demands are highly diverse. Employers expect the graduates possess 
multi-disciplinary competency, Information and Communication Technology (ICT), and 
leadership skills. In this context, Nitte Deemed to be Univer sity offers the opportunity to the 
students to select the courses of their choice and helps them in grooming to have well -rounded 
personalities and become industry ready. 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 12 ===

           
 
Page | 12   
 
 
 
Efforts have been made to develop the curriculum, compliant with international professional 
societies. 
As part of providing quality engineering education, Nitte Deemed to be University, has initiated 
the Choice Based Credit System (CBCS) into its academic curriculum. By this, the students can 
register for courses of their choice and alter the pace of learning within the broad framework of 
academic courses and credit requirements. CBCS allows students to plan for their academic load  
and alter it as they progress in learning. Students also have the option of choosing cour ses from 
a pool of courses within each classification. Ample options are given to choose interdisciplinary 
courses from other programs which will help the student to develop additional skills. Slow 
learners will also be benefitted since important courses a re offered in all semesters. This 
arrangement helps the students to re -register and clear the backlog courses in the subsequent 
semester. Suitable provisions are made for fast learners to associate them with research activities 
of faculty members and contribute to research beyond the working hours. 
 
A mentor helps the student in identifying the courses to be studied in each semester based on 
program requirements, course prerequisites, student’s interest in various disciplines, past 
academic performance, and courses offered by the departments. 
 
Learning becomes more ‘experiential’ by carrying out labs associated with theory, mini-projects, 
and Project Based Learning (PBL) as a part of many courses which enhances the capability of 
students in understanding and apply Engineering /Technology concept s to solve real life -
problems. Hence students will develop the ability to apply the gained knowledge in multi -
disciplinary projects and be able to take up major projects based on real -world problems and 
come up with better solutions while addressing social concerns. 

=== PAGE 13 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
Page | 1  
 
 
 
REGULATIONS  
COMMON TO ALL B.Tech. (CBCS) DEGREE PROGRAMS OF 
NITTE (Deemed to be University) 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
1.1. The general regulations are common to all B.Tech.(CBCS) Degree Programs offered 
by NITTE (Deemed to be University) at Nitte and Bangalore Off campuses and shall 
be called “B.Tech.  Regulations”. 
1.2. The provisions contained in this set of regulations govern the policies and procedures 
on the Registration of students, imparting instructions of courses, the conduct of the 
examination & evaluation, certification of student performance, and all amendments 
related to the said Degree program(s). 
1.3. This set of Regulations, on approval by the Academic Council and Executive Council, 
shall supersede all the corresponding earlier sets of regulations of the B. Tech Degree 
program of NITTE (Deemed to be University) along with all the amendments thereto, 
and shall be binding on all students undergoing the Graduate Degree Program(s) 
(Choice Based Credit System) conducted at Nitte and Bangalore Off campus es with 
effect from its date of approval. This set of Regulations may evolve and get modified 
or changed through appropriate approvals from the Academic Council / Executive 
Committee from time to time and shall be binding on all stakeholders.  The decision s 
of the Academic Council (AC) and Executive Council (EC) shall be final and binding. 
1.4. To guarantee fairness and justice to the parties concerned given the periodic 
evolutionary refinements, any specific issues or matters of concern shall be addressed 
separately, by the appropriate authorities, as and when found necessary. 
1.5. The Academic Council may consider any issues or matters of Concern relating to any 
or all the academic activities of Engineering courses for appropriate action, 
irrespective of whether a reference is made here in this set of Regulations or otherwise. 
1.6. The program shall be called Bachelor of Technology, abbreviated as B.Tech.  
(Program Title). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

=== PAGE 14 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 2   
2. ELIGIBILITY FOR ADMISSION 
Sl. 
No. 
Program Duration Eligibility 
1 B. Tech. 4 years Passed 10+2 examination with Physics/ Mathematics / Chemistry/ 
Computer Science/ Electronics/ Information Technology/ Biology/ 
Informatics Practices/ Biotechnology/ Technical Vocational subject 
as per Table-1. Obtained at least 50% marks (40% marks in case  of 
candidates belonging to reserved category) in the above subjects taken 
together. 
The specific eligibility requirements will be published in admission 
brochure from time to time. 
2 B.Tech. 
(Lateral 
Entry to 
Second 
year) 
3 years Passed Minimum THREE years / TWO years (Lateral Entry) 
Diploma examination with at least 45% marks (40% marks in case of 
candidates belonging to reserved category) in relevant branch of 
Engineering and Technology. (The University will offer suitable 
bridge courses such as Mathematics, Physics, Engineering drawing, 
etc., for the students coming from diverse backgrounds to prepare 
Level playing field and desired learning outcomes of the program). 
 
Table-1 
Academic Level and Credit Framework for admission to Bachelor of Technology (B.Tech.)             
degree program 
Sl. 
No. Academic 
Level Desired Entry Qualifications at different levels. 
NHEQF/ 
NCrF 
Level 
at Exit 
1 12th Std. - 4 
2 
First Year 
B.Tech. 
Degree 
12th Completed (NHEQF level 4 completed) 4.5 
3 
Second Year 
B.Tech. 
Degree 
A candidate with a UG Certificate in Engineering or Diploma in 
the appropriate branch of Engineering/ Equivalent Vocational or 
Technical Program with NHEQF level 4.5 completed 
5 
 
2.1. Qualifications from foreign countries 
Candidates with qualifications from educational institutions outside of India may be 
admitted to the program(s) subject to the establishment of equivalence by the university. 
The Program Committee will evaluate and establish the eligibility of such candidates. 
 
  

=== PAGE 15 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 3   
3. PROGRAM PATHS, EXIT OPTIONS, AND DURATION OF THE B. 
TECH. PROGRAM 
3.1 Program paths, exit options. 
Sl. 
No 
Academic 
Level Entry Level Qualifications Qualifications at 
Exit 
NCrF 
Level 
1 1st yr. of 
UG Degree 
A candidate completing 10+2 years with 
Diploma of Vocation or passed 12th std. or 
equivalent vocational training with NCrF 
level 4 
UG Certificate* 4.5 
2 2nd yr. of 
UG Degree 
A candidate with Diploma in appropriate 
branch of Engineering/ UG Certificate/ 
Equivalent Vocational or Technical Program 
NCrF level 4.5 
UG Diploma 
(Engg.) * 5.0 
3 3rd yr. of UG 
Degree 
A candidate with 10+3+1/12+2/ UG Diploma 
(Engg.) in appropriate domain with NCrF 
level 5 
B. Sc (Engg.) * 5.5 
4 
Final yr. of 
UG Degree 
A candidate with 3-year Bachelor’s degree 
B.Sc. (Engg.) with NCrF level 5.5 
B. Tech 
(On completion of 
165 credits with a 
minimum CGPA of 
5) 
6 
Final yr. of 
UG Degree 
with Honours 
A candidate with 3-year Bachelor’s degree 
B.Sc. (Engg.) with NCrF level 5.5 
B. Tech (Honors) 
183 credits 
(Additional 18 credits 
over and above 165 
credits in the same 
discipline) 
6 
Final yr. of 
UG Degree 
with a minor 
in (Other 
Discipline). 
A candidate with 3-year Bachelor’s degree 
B.Sc. (Engg.) with NCrF level 5.5 
B. Tech with Minor 
183 credits. 
Additional 18 
credits over and 
above 165 credits in 
other disciplines 
6 
* It is mandatory to earn 4 credits through Discipline specific Internship/ Training/ 
Specialised courses before the award of Qualifications at Exit. 
 
3.2 Duration of the B. Tech. program 
3.2.1 The B. Tech Program shall extend over a period of a total duration of 4 years for 
students admitted during the first year of the program. 
3.2.2 The total duration shall be 3 years for students admitted to the second year under 
the lateral entry scheme. 
3.2.3 The maximum period which a student can take to complete a full-time academic 
program is eight years / Six years for Lateral entry diploma students for B.Tech.  
3.2.4 Each year shall have the following schedule with 5  ½ days a week. Suggested 
break down of Academic Year into Semesters. 
  

=== PAGE 16 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 4   
 
i)  No. of 
Semesters 
/ Year 
There are three semesters in an academic year.  
● Two Main semesters (Odd, Even) followed by a summer semester. 
● Normally the Odd Semester will be from August to December and Even 
Semester from January to May during a calendar year.  
● The optional summer semester is offered during the vacation period of 
the even semester.  
● The summer semester is offered considering th e demand for such 
courses of needy students, subject to the availability of time, faculty, 
and other resources under a fast -track mode as the available 
instructional days during even semester vacation periods are less. 
However, the number of instructional hours needed to cover the syllabi 
shall be maintained (equivalent to that in the regular semester) with a 
greater number of instructional hours per week. 
Note: The summer semester is primarily to assist slow learners and/or 
failed students in the main semesters.  The summer semester may be 
used to arrange Add-On courses for other students and/or for deputing 
them for practical training elsewhere. 
ii)  Semester 
Duration 
Main semester (Odd, Even) each 20 Weeks; Summer Semester 8 Weeks 
iii)  Academic  
Activities 
(Weeks) 
ODD / EVEN Semester 
Registration of Courses & Course Work      (16) 
Examination Preparation and Examination      (04) 
Total      (20) 
Summer Semester 
Registration of Courses & Course Work       (05) 
Examination Preparation and Examination       (03) 
Total       (08) 
Declaration of results: 02 weeks from the date of 
the last examination 
Inter-Semester Recess: 
After each Main Semester                                      (02) 
Total Vacation: 10 weeks (for those who do not register for the summer 
semester) and 4 weeks (for those who register for the summer semester) 
Note:  
● In each semester, there will be provision for students to register for courses at the 
beginning, dropping of courses in the middle, and withdraw from courses towards 
the end, under the advice of a faculty member. These facilities are expected to 
enhance the learning capabilities of students, minimizin g their chances of failure in 
courses registered and ensuring their better monitoring by Faculty Advisors). 
● A regular candidate shall be allowed a maximum duration of eight years from the day 
of admission to Ist semester to become eligible for the award of a Bachelor's degree. 
● The calendar of events in respect of the program shall be fixed by the Institution from 
time to time, but preferably in line with the suggested academic calendar of the 
NITTE (Deemed to be University). 

=== PAGE 17 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 5   
4. DEGREE PROGRAMS 
4.1 Undergraduate B. Tech. Degree Programs are offered in the following disciplines by 
the respective program hosting departments listed below: 
i)  Artificial Intelligence and Data Science (AID) 
ii)  Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning (AIM) 
iii)  Aeronautical Engineering (AER) 
iv)  Biotechnology (BTY) 
v)  Civil Engineering (CIV) 
vi)  Computer Science & Engineering (CSE) 
vii)  Computer Science & Engineering (Cyber Security) (CYB) 
viii)  Computer and Communication Engineering (CCE) 
ix)  Computer Science and Business Systems (CBS) 
x)  Electrical & Electronics Engineering (EEE) 
xi)  Electronics & Communication Engineering (ECE) 
xii)  Electronics & Communication (Advanced Communication 
Technology) 
(ACT) 
xiii)  Electronics Engineering (VLSI Design and Technology) (VDT) 
xiv)  Information Science & Engineering (ISE) 
xv)  Mechanical Engineering (MEC) 
xvi)  Robotics and Artificial Intelligence (RAI) 
Other teaching departments are – 
i)  Chemistry (CHY) 
ii)  Humanities and Social Sciences (HSS) 
iii)  Mathematics (MAT) 
iv)  Management  (MGM) 
v)  Physics (PHY) 
 
4.2 The provisions of these regulations shall apply to any new discipline that may be 
introduced from time to time and appended to the above list. 
 
5. CREDIT SYSTEM 
In the Credit System, the course work of students is unitized, and each unit is assigned one 
credit after a student completes the teaching-learning process as prescribed for that unit and 
is successful in its assessment.  
5.1 Credit Definition: The following widely accepted definition for credit can provide 
good flexibility to the students and strengthens CBCS under the University. Here, 
one unit of course work and its corresponding one credit (while referring to the main 
semester) shall be equal to: 
● Four-credit theory courses (4 -0-0) shall be designed for 60 hours of the 
Teaching-Learning process.  
● Four-credit theory + tutorial courses (3 -1-0) shall be designed for 45 Lecture 
hours and 15 tutorial hours of the Teaching-Learning process. 
● Three-credit t heory courses (3 -0-0) shall be designed for 45 hours of the 
Teaching-Learning process. 

=== PAGE 18 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 6   
● Three-credit theory + tutorial courses (2 -1-0) shall be designed for 30 Lecture 
hours and 15 tutorial hours of the Teaching-Learning process 
● Two-credit theory courses sh all be designed for 30 hours of the Teaching -
Learning process. 
● Two-credit theory + Practical courses (1 -0-2) shall be designed for 15 Lecture 
hours and 30 hours of Practical classes of the Teaching-Learning process 
● One credit theory course shall be designed for 15 hours of the Teaching-Learning 
process. 
 The above figures shall also be applicable in the case of the summer semester.   
Other student activities which are not demanding intellectually, or which do not 
lend to effective assessment, like practical  training, study tours, and attending 
guest lectures shall not carry any credit. 
 
5.2 Credit Assignment and Lower & Upper Limits for Course Credits Registration 
in a Semester  
All courses comprise a specific Lecture/Tutorial/Practical/Project (L -T-P-J) 
schedule. The course credits are fixed based on the following norms. 
Lecture / Tutorials / Practical: 
● 1-hour Lecture per week is assigned 1.0 Credit. 
● 1-hour Tutorial session per week is assigned 1.0 Credit. 
● 2-hour Lab. Session/project work per week is assigned 1.0 credit. 
For example,  
● A theory course with an L-T-P schedule of 3-1-0 hours will be assigned 4.0 credits.  
● A laboratory practical course with an L-T-P schedule of 0-0-2 hours will be assigned 
1.0 credit. 
● Calculation of Contact Hours / Week – A Typical Example 
Example: 
An L-T-P-C of 2-1-2-4 means 2 instructional units based on classroom lecture (L), 
one instructional unit of the tutorial (T), and one laboratory (P) based instructional 
unit all delivered during a calendar week and repeated for the entire duration of the 
semester to earn 4 credits (C) after passing the course. 
● For every academic year, the courses in the curriculum shall be classified as: 
- Semester-Designated Courses (shall be registered only in the semester specified) 
- Year-flexible Courses (may be registered in either the odd or the even semester 
of the same academic year, subject to availability and student’s academic plan). 
● As advised by the faculty advisor, a student shall register for a minimum of 18 credits 
and a maximum of 26 credits in each semester, subject to fulfilment of pre-requisites, 
wherever applicable; availability of the course during the semester; and approval  of 
the Faculty Mentor.  
● Students registering for Minor degree program shall be allowed to register for a 
maximum of 28 credits from IV semester onwards. 
●  Students registering for Honors degree program shall be allowed to register for a 
maximum of 28 credits from V semester onwards. 
● The maximum number of credits a student can register during a summer semester 
shall be 16. However, in special cases, the student may be permitted to register 
additional 2 credits with the approval of the Department Undergraduat e Committee 

=== PAGE 19 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 7   
(DUGC). There is no minimum number of credits fixed for course registration during 
the summer semester. 
 
6. REGISTRATION 
6.1. Every student after consulting his/ her Faculty Advisor in the parent department shall 
register for the approved courses (core and elective) to earn credits for meeting the 
requirements of a degree program at the commencement of each Semester on the days 
fixed for such registration and notified in the academic calendar.  Students who fail to 
register on or before the specified date will be allowed to register within one week of 
the last date by paying a late fee. Such courses together with their grade and credits 
earned will be included in the grade card issued by the University at the end of each 
semester, like ODD, EVEN, and summer and it forms the basis for determining the 
student’s performance in that semester. 
● Each course will be identified by a unique Course Code of eight alpha -numerals 
The alphabets reflect the discipline to which the course belongs. The number 
preceding the alphabets indicates the year of implementation. The first numeral 
(after the alphabet) indicates the learning level (based on prerequisites) of the 
course, and the rest of the two numerals indicate a running serial number. 
Example: 25EEE101 represents the course implemented in 2025, offered by EEE 
Dept., Academic Level-1, course serial number is 01  
 
6.2. Mandatory Pre-Registration for higher semester 
To facilitate proper planning of the academic activities of the Semester, the students 
must declare their intention to register for courses of every semester (2nd Semester and 
above) at least two weeks before the end of the current semester choosing the courses 
offered by each department in the next higher semester which is displayed on the 
Department Notice Board at least 4 weeks before the last working day of the semester. 
Registration to a higher semester is allowed only if the student fulfills the following 
conditions. 
● Satisfied all the academic requirements to continue with the program of studies.  
● Cleared all Institute, hostel, and library dues and fines, if any, of the previous 
semester. 
● Paid all required fees of the Institute and the hostel for the current semester. 
● Has not been debarred from registering on any specific grounds by the Institute. 
Note:  
(i) Diploma students who are admitted to the second year through Lateral entry 
should register for mandatory non -credit Mathematics Bridge courses as 
prescribed, during 3rd and 4th semesters respectively. They shall attend these 
bridge course classes during the respective semesters to satisfy attendance and 
CIE requirements. 
(ii) Completion of Mathematics Bridge courses shall be mandatory for the award 
of the degree. 
 
6.3. Registering for Backlog Courses 
6.3.1. Students who have not cleared a course (Theory/ Lab/ project) are shown with 

=== PAGE 20 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 8   
“F” grade. A course having an ‘F’ grade will be considered as a backlog and it 
has to be re-registered in the subsequent semesters. F-graded courses are eligible 
to register for the next level course (pre-requisite is met).  
6.3.2. Re-registration fee will be as per the university norms existing at the time of re-
registration.  When a course is re-registered, the evaluation marks of that course 
shall be treated as canceled/ reset.  
6.3.3. To provide an early opportunity for students to clear their backlog of courses, 
efforts will be made to offer as many courses as possible during Odd, Even and 
summer semesters. 
 
7. ADD/DROP/AUDIT OPTIONS 
7.1 Registration of courses 
Each student shall have to register for course work at the beginning of a semester 
within 2 to 3 days of commencement after discussing with the course teacher and 
under faculty advice. (Refer Section 5.2) 
 
7.2 DROP-option 
During a specified period in t he middle of a semester student’s performance in CIE 
is reviewed by the faculty advisor. Following a poor performance by a student, he/she 
can be facilitated to drop identified course(s) (up to the minimum credits specified 
for the semester). Such course(s ) will not be mentioned in the Grade card. Such 
courses are to be re -registered by these students and taken up for study in a 
subsequent odd / even/ summer semester.  
 
7.3 Withdrawal from courses (Letter Grade “W”) 
During a specific period specified towards th e end of the semester, a student’s 
performance in CIE is reviewed by the faculty advisors. Following a poor 
performance by a student in the identified course (s) he/she is advised to withdraw 
from such course(s) (up to the minimum credits specified for the  semester) with a 
mention in the Grade card (Grade “W”).  Such courses to be re -registered by these 
students and taken up for study at a later point in time. 
 
7.4 AUDIT-option (Letter Grade “U”) 
A student can register for courses for audit only, to supplement his/her knowledge 
and/or skills. The audit courses shall not be considered in determining the student’s 
academic performance (SGPA and CGPA) in the semester.  “U” grade is awarded to 
such courses and will be reflected in the grade card on satisfying the at tendance 
requirements and CIE requirements. The candidate need not appear for SEE in such 
courses. However, CORE courses shall not be made available for audit. 
  

=== PAGE 21 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 9   
8. PROGRAM STRUCTURE 
8.1 Types of courses  
A “Course” is defined as a unit of learning that typically lasts one semester, led by one 
or more teachers, for a fixed roster of students. A course has identified course 
outcomes, modules/units of study, specified teaching -learning methods, and 
assessment schemes. A course may be designed to include lectures, tutorials, practical, 
laboratory work, field work, project work, internship experiences, seminars, self-study 
components, online learning modules, etc. in any combination. 
The following types of courses are included in the B. Tech. program: 
(a) Humanities, Social Sciences, and Management Courses (HSMC):  These are 
common courses for all disciplines. 
(b) Basic Science Courses (BSC): Physics, Chemistry, and Mathematics: These are 
mandatory for all disciplines.  
(c) Engineering Science Courses (ESC):  Basics of Elect rical/ Electronics/ Civil/ 
Mechanical/ Computer Engineering, etc.  These are mandatory for all disciplines. 
(d) Professional Core Courses (PCC): These are the professional Core Courses, 
relevant to the chosen specialization/ branch. The core courses shall be 
compulsorily studied by students, and it is mandatory to complete them to fulfill 
the requirements of a Program. 
(e) Professional Elective Courses (PEC): These are professional Electives, relevant 
to the chosen specialization/branch and can be chosen from the pool of courses. It 
shall be supportive to the discipline providing extended scope/enabling exposure 
to some other discipline /domain and nurturing student proficiency skills. 
(f) Open Elective Courses (OEC):  These are the Elective Courses from other 
technical areas and/ or emerging fields. Students of other departments shall opt 
for these courses for fulfilling the eligibility and prerequisites mentioned in the 
syllabus. 
(g) Integrated Professional Core Courses (IPCC): It refers to Professional Theory 
Core Course Integrated with Practical of the same course. Credit for IPCC shall 
be 04 considering L: T: P as 3:0:1 or L: T: P as 2:1:1, (where L, T, and P represent 
credits not hours per week) 
(h) Emerging Technology Courses (ETC):  These courses are designed to teach 
students about developing technologies that will be available within the next five 
to ten years and are expected to create significant social or economic effects.  
(i) Programming Language Courses (PLC):  These courses are designed to teach 
students languages t hat can be used to communicate with computers for 
developing and working on different applications. 
(j) Project Work (PRJ):  Provide experiential learning opportunities for students. 
Students are required individually, or in a small group, to select and complet e a 
project that may include review, design, development, curation, analysis, etc. with 
the application of skills and knowledge relevant to the area of study. Project work 
to be carried out at the parent Institution, or any university / Government 
recognized organization without affecting the regular class work. 
(k) Internship (INT): The internship (a form of experimental learning) program is a 
workplace-based professional learning experience that offers supervised exposure 

=== PAGE 22 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 10   
to real -life work experience in an ar ea related to the field of study or career 
interest. An internship may be undertaken at a workplace such as an industry/R&D 
organization/Government organization, or any other reputed organization/ 
institution recognized for the purpose by the University. T he internship program 
not only helps fresh pass-outs in gaining professional know-how but also benefits 
corporate sectors. The internship also enhances the employability skills of the 
student passing out from Technical Institutions. 
(l) Community Engagement (C EN): enable students to learn about challenges 
faced by vulnerable households and develop an understanding of local wisdom 
and lifestyle in a respectful manner. It enables the students to  
● Gain an understanding of rural life, Indian culture and ethos and social 
realities. 
●  Develop a sense of empathy and bonds of mutuality with the local 
community.   
● Appreciate significant contributions of local communities to Indian society 
and economy.   
● Learn to value the local knowledge and wisdom of the community   
● Identify opportunities for contributing to community’s socio -economic 
improvements. 
(m) Mandatory Non-Credit Courses (MNC):  These courses are mandatory, without 
the benefit of a grade or credit, passing each mandatory course is required to 
qualify for the award of a degree. 
● Assessment of these courses is conducted in the college and will include 
Continuous Internal Evaluation (CIE). University Semester End Evaluation 
(SEE) may not be necessary for these courses. 
● A minimum of 40% of the prescribed marks of CIE  are required to secure a 
passing grade in these courses. 
● The ‘PP’ grade is awarded for a Pass in the course and the ‘NP’ grade is 
awarded for a Fail in the course. In case an ‘NP’ grade is awarded, the student 
has to re-register for the same course wherein he has no alternative options.  
● The “PP” and “NP” grades do not carry grade points and are hence not 
included in the Semester Grade Point Average (SGPA) and Cumulative Grade 
Point Average (CGPA) computations. However, such non -credit mandatory 
courses ar e required to be included in the students’ performance records 
(transcript) with Pass or Fail (PP or NP). 
● Courses that come under this category are Employability Skill Development, 
Kannada etc. 
(n) Ability Enhancement Courses (AEC):  These courses are designed to help 
students to enhance their skills in language, communication, personality 
development, etc. They also promote a deeper understanding of courses like social 
sciences, ethics, culture, human behavior human rights, and the law. Ability 
Enhancement Cour ses are based upon the content that leads to knowledge 
enhancement. 
 

=== PAGE 23 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 11   
8.2 Typical Breakdown of Courses for the B.Tech. Degree Curriculum: 
Sl. No. Course Category Credit Range Suggested 
Credits 
1. Basic Science Courses (BSC) 30-32 31 
2. Engineering Science Courses (ESC) 12-15 
18-21 
14 
3. Emerging Technology Courses (ETC) 02 02 
4. Programming Language Courses (PLC) 04 04 
5. Professional Core Courses (PCC)*  52 - 55 55 
6. Professional Elective Courses (PEC)  12-15 12 
7. Open Elective Courses (OEC) 6 06 
8. Humanities, Social Sciences and 
Management courses (HSMC) 
12-15 14 
9. Ability Enhancement Courses 
(AEC)/Skill Enhancement Courses 
(SEC) 
8-12 11 
10.  Mandatory Non-credit Courses (MNC)  Non-Credit 00 
13.  Project Work (PRJ) 10 10 
14.  Internship (INT)  04 04 
15 Community Engagement (CEN) 02 02 
15. Note: Student can register between 18 to 26 credits per semester 165  Total minimum Credits to be earned: 165 
          * Including One discipline specific vocational Skill enhancement course 
 
8.2.1 The Department Undergraduate Committee (DUGC) will discuss and 
recommend the exact credits offered for the program for the above components, 
the semester -wise distribution among them, as well as the syllabi of all 
undergraduate courses offered by the department from time to time before 
sending the same to the Board of Studies (BOS). The BOS will consider the 
proposals from the departments and make recommendations to the  Academic 
Council for consideration and approval. 
 
8.3 The earned Credit Requirements for the B.Tech. Degree is 165. 
Degree is awarded by prescribing the total number of credits to be earned, rather than 
by using the program duration, giving flexibility to a student to plan their career. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

=== PAGE 24 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 12   
 
8.4 Suggested Program Structure  
8.4.1 Suggested distribution of credits for the Common B. Tech Curriculum N(DU) 
for Nitte and Bangalore off campuses effective from the AY 2026-27 
 
Type of Course Credits 
range 
Suggested Semester Wise Credit Distribution Total Credits I & II III & IV V & VI VII VIII 
Basic Science Courses (BSC) 31 19 12    31 
Engineering Science Courses 
(ESC) 14 14     14 
Emerging Technology Courses  
(ETC) 2   2   2 
Programming Language 
Courses (PLC) 4 4     4 
Professional Core Courses 
(PCC) 52-55  27 20 8  55 
Professional Elective Courses 
(PEC) 12-15   9 3  12 
Open Elective Courses (OEC) 6   6   6 
Humanities, Social Sciences 
and Management Courses 
(HSMC) 
14 3 3 5 3  14 
Ability & 
Skill 
Enhancement 
Courses 
(AEC) 
Option-1 
8 
2 4 
2   8 
Option-2 4 2 
Foreign Language 
Course/Research Methodology 
(AEC) 
3    3  3 
Community Engagement 
(CEN) 2     2 2 
Professional Practice (PRP) 14 -     14 - 14 
14 Capstone Project/ 
Research Project (PRJ) - 10     - 10 14 
Internship (INT)  - 4     - 4 
Mandatory Non-credit Courses 
(MNC)   0 0   0 
* Option-1 
165 
42 46 
44 17 16 165 * Option-2 44 44 
There are two options in choosing Ability Enhancement Courses (AEC) 
o NMAMIT Nitte - has chosen Option-1 
o NMIT Bangalore -has chosen Option-2 
(* As applicable) 
 
   
  

=== PAGE 25 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 13   
8.4.2 Suggested Course Offerings During the First Year for 
                              Computer Science and allied branches (AIM, AID, CBS, CCE, CSE, CYB, ISE and RAI) 
 
I & II SEMESTER 
Sl. 
No. 
Course Type and 
Course Code Course Title 
Teaching 
Department 
Contact 
Hours/Week 
SL 
Examination 
Credits 
L T P J 
Duration in 
Hours 
CIE Marks 
SEE Marks 
Total Marks 
1 BSC 26MAT103 Advanced 
Calculus MAT 3 1 - - 1 3 60 40 100 4 
2 BSC 26PHY102 
Quantum 
Computing and 
Modern Physics 
PHY 3 - 2 - 2 3 60 40 100 4 
3 BSC 26MAT106 Linear Algebra MAT 3 1 0 - 1 3 60 40 100 4 
4 BSC 26CHY104 
Materials 
Chemistry for 
Devices and E-
Waste 
Management 
CHY 3 0 2 - 2 3 60 40 100 4 
5 BSC 26CIV104 
Environmental 
Science & 
Sustainability 
CIV 2 - - - 1 3 60 40 100 2 
6 BSC 26BTY111 Biology for 
Engineers BTY 1 - - - - 1 60 40 100 1 
7 ESC 26CSE103 
Problem 
Solving 
Through 
Programming 
CSE 
(Allied) 3 - 2 - 2 3 60 40 100 4 
8 ESC 26ECE111 Basic 
Electronics ECE 3 - - - 1 3 60 40 100 3 
9 ESC 26ECE101 Applied Digital 
Logic Design ECE 2 0 2 - 1 3 60 40 100 3 
10 ESC 26EEE102 
Elements of 
Electrical 
Engineering 
EEE 3 0 0  1 3 60 40 100 3 
11 ESC 26MEC122 Engineering 
Visualization MEC - - 2 - 1 - 60 - 60 1 
12 HSMC 26HSS102 
Universal 
Human Values 
& Professional 
Ethics 
Any 2 - - - 1 3 60 40 100 2 
13 HSMC 26HSS101 
Constitution of 
India & Global 
Citizenship 
HSS 1 0 0 - - 0 60 0 60 1 

=== PAGE 26 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 14   
14 PLC 26CSE102 
Introduction to 
Python 
Programming 
CSE 
(Allied) 
/MEC 
2 0 2 - 1 3 60 40 100 3 
15 PLC 26MAT107 Mathematics 
with MATLAB MAT 0 0 2 - - 0 60 0 60 1 
16 AEC 26HSS131 Communicative 
English HSS 1 0 2 - 1 3 60 40 100 2 
17 AEC 26HSS132 Knowing 
Yourself HSS - - 2 - -  60 - 60 1 
18 AEC 26HSS133 Pathways to 
Success HSS - - 2  - 0 60 0 60 1 
Total (Option-1) 32 2 16 - 16 37 960 520 1480 42 
Total (Option 2) 32 2 20 - 16 37 1080 520 1600 44 
                    26HSS132 and 26HSS133 are offered only at NMIT, Bangalore 
 
Mandatory Community Engagement 
19 INT 
Community 
Engagement 
(Activity-based 
Internship) 
1) Social Connect & Responsibility (15 hours lecture to 
be engaged during second semester) 25 # 0 
100 2* 2) Activity based Internship to focus on the activities 
pertaining to Social Connect & Responsibility (1 week 
duration (40 - 45 hours) to be completed during the 
vacations of II, IV, V & VI Semesters.) 
75 0 
          
                 # To be evaluated for 60 marks and scaled down to 25 marks 
                  * The grades will be included in the VIII semester grade card  
 

=== PAGE 27 ===

            Regulations and Syllabus- B. Tech. 
Page | 15  
 
                                                                                                                                                                   
8.5 Capstone Project Work/Professional Practice Report  
8.5.1 Project work can be carried out as domain -specific /interdisciplinary under the guidance 
of faculty/ faculty members or the students can also opt for Professional Practice in an 
Industry / Research Institution/Center of excellence. 
8.5.2 Viva-voce examination shall be conducted individually. 
 
8.6 ELECTIVES 
8.6.1 A candidate shall take electives in each semester from groups of electives, commencing 
from the 5th semester. 
8.6.2 The minimum number of students to be registered for any Elective offered shall not be 
less than fifteen (15) and should not exceed forty (40). 
8.6.3 A can didate shall opt for his/her choice of electives and register for the same at the 
beginning of each of the 5th to 7th semesters if pre-registration is not done. The candidate 
is permitted to opt for a change of elective within 15 days from the date of commencement 
of the semester as per the academic calendar of the college. 
 
9. ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENT 
9.1 Each semester is considered as a unit and the candidate has to put in a minimum attendance of 
85% in each subject with a provision of condoning 10% of the attendance by the principal for 
reasons such as medical grounds, participation in University level sports, cultural activities, 
seminars, workshops, and paper presentation. 
 
9.2 The basis for the calculation of the attendance shall be the term prescribed by the institution by 
its calendar of events. For the first semester students, the same is reckoned from the date of 
admission to the course. 
 
9.3 The students shall be informed about their attendance position in the first week of every month 
by the College so that the students shall be cautioned to make up for the shortage. 
 
9.4 A candidate having a shortage of attendance (<75%) in any course(s) registered shall not be 
allowed to appear for SEE of such course(s). Such students will be awarded an ‘N’ grade in these 
courses. 
 
9.5 He/she shall have to repeat those course(s) with an ‘N’ grade and shall re -register for the same 
course(s) core or elective, as the case may be when the particular course is offered next either in 
a main (odd/even) or summer semester. 
 
9.6 Attendance in CIE and SEE: Attendance in all examinations both CIE and SEE of each course 
registered shall be compulsory and there shall not be any provision for re -examinations.  Any 
student against whom any disciplinary action is pending shall not be permitted to attend any SEE 
in that semester. 
  

=== PAGE 28 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 16   
10. WITHDRAWAL FROM THE PROGRAM 
10.1 Temporary Withdrawal 
A student who has been admitted to a degree program of the college may be permitted once 
during the program to withdraw temporarily, for one semester, on the grounds of prolonged 
illness or grave calamity in the family, etc., provided – 
i. The student applies to the College within 6 weeks of the commencement of the college 
stating fully the reasons for withdrawal together with supporting documents and 
endorsement from his parent/guardian. 
ii. The College is satisfied with the genuineness of the case and that even by considering 
the expected period of withdrawal, the student can complete the program requirements 
(165 credits) within the time limits specified by the university. 
iii. The student does not have any dues or demands at the College / University including 
tuition and other fees as well as library material. 
iv. A student availing of temporary withdrawal shall be required to pay such fees and/or 
charges as may be fixed by the college until his/her name appears on the student’s roll 
list. The fees/charges once paid shall not be refunded. 
v. A student will be entitled to avail of the temporary withdrawal facility only once during 
his/her studentship. However, any other concessio n for the concerned student shall 
have to be approved by the academic council. 
 
10.2 Permanent Withdrawal 
Any student who withdraws the admission before the closing date of admission for the 
Academic Session is eligible for the refund of the deposits only. Fees once paid will not be 
refunded on any account.  
Once the admission for the year is closed, the follo wing conditions govern withdrawal of 
admissions. 
i) A student who wants to leave the College for good will be permitted to do so (and take 
a Transfer Certificate from the College, if needed), only after clearing all other dues if 
any. 
ii) Those students who have received any scholarship, stipend, or other forms of assistance 
from the College shall repay all such amounts. 
iii) The decision of the Principal of the College regarding the withdrawal of a student is final 
and binding. 
 
11. EVALUATION SYSTEM 
11.1 The Academic Per formance Evaluation of a student shall be according to a Letter Grading 
System, based on the Class Performance Distribution. 
11.2 The Letter grades O, A+, A, B+, B, C, P, and F indicate the level of academic achievement, 
assessed on a decimal (0-10) scale. 
11.3 The Letter grade awarded to a student in a course, for which he has registered shall be based 
on his performance in quizzes, tutorials, assignments, etc., as applicable, in addition to two 
mid-semester examinations and one semester-end examination. The distribution of weightage 
among these components may be as follows. 
  

=== PAGE 29 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 17   
 
Semester End Examination (SEE) : Conducted for 100 
or 50 marks and 
further scaled 
down to 40 marks 
Continuous Internal Evaluation (CIE)  :  (60 marks) 
CIE for Non-PBL Courses   
i) Learning activities (LA): Quizzes (MCQs), 
Tutorials, Assignments, Seminars, Participative 
learning etc. 
: 20 marks 
ii) Sum of two Mid-semester Examinations : 40 marks 
CIE for IPCC Courses or courses with PBL 
component 
  
Theory Part: (Assessment =60 marks)   
i) Learning activities (LA): Quizzes (MCQs), 
Tutorials, Assignments, Seminars, Participative 
learning etc. 
 20 marks 
ii) Sum of two Mid-semester Examinations : 40 marks 
Practical part /PBL component:  (Assessment =60 
marks) 
  
i) Practical part /Project Based Learning (PBL) : 60 marks 
Final; CIE marks for IPCC Courses or courses with PBL component is sum of the 
marks of Theory Part and Practical part with weightages as given below. 
60% weightage for theory part (0.6x60=36 marks) + 40% weightage 
forPractical part / PBL component (0.4x60=24 marks) 
Any variation, other than the above distribution, requires the approval of the pertinent DUGC 
and Academic Council. 
 
11.4 The letter grade awarded to a student in a 0-0-P (Practical) course, is based on an appropriate 
continuous evaluation scheme that the course instructor shall evolve, with the approval of the 
pertinent DUGC and the performance in SEE held on the specified period in a semester. 
 
11.5 Evaluation Scheme (Refer to Appendix -B for detailed evaluation guidelines) : The course 
Instructor shall announce in the class and/or display at the Notice board/faculty door/website 
the details of the Evaluation Scheme, including the distribution of the weightage for each of 
the components and method of conversion from the raw s cores to the letter-grades within the 
first week of the semester in which the course is offered so that there are no ambiguities in 
communicating the same to all the students concerned.  
11.5.1 Internship: Mandatory Internship is in two parts. Community Engagement (2 weeks-
(2 credits)) and Industry Internship (4 weeks-(4 credits)) 
11.5.1.1 Community Engagement 
All the students admitted to the 1 st semester of engineering programs shall 
have to undergo Community Engagement  
▪ Social connect & Responsibility (15 hours lecture to be engaged during 
second semester) 

=== PAGE 30 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 18   
▪ Community Engagement to focus on the activities pertaining to Social 
Connect & Responsibil ity (1 week duration (40 - 45 hours) to be 
completed during the vacations, preferably during II Semester or IV 
semester (only for lateral entry students) 
▪ The internship shall include Inter / Intra Institutional activities. A viva 
– voce examination (Presentation followed by question-answer session) 
shall be conducted during the 2 nd semester (for lateral entry students, 
during the 4 th semester) and the prescribed credit shall be included in 
the 8th -semester grade card.  
▪ All the students admitted to the 3rd semester of Engineering programs 
(Lateral Entry Category) shall have to undergo a mandatory internship 
of 02 weeks (during the 3rd semester or the intervening period of the 3rd 
and 4th semesters). The internship shall include Inter/Intra Institutional 
activities.   
▪ The internship shall be considered as a head of passing and shall be 
considered for the award of a degree. Those who  do not take up / 
complete the internship shall be declared to fail and shall have to 
complete it during subsequent University exa minations after satisfying 
the internship requirements. (The faculty coordinator or mentor has to 
monitor the student’s internship progress and interact to guide them for 
the successful completion of the internship).  
▪ Procedure for the Evaluation of Community Engagement 
o Students should submit the reports immediately on completion of the 
Community Engagement to the respective mentors. 
o The Examination of the Community Engagement will be carried out 
by the mentor. 
o The Community Engagement shall be slated for 100 marks CIE only 
and will not have SEE. 
o Community Engagement marks are based on CIE marks (25 marks 
for the Social Connect and Responsibility, 25 marks for the 
presentation, and 50 marks for the report and final presentation).  
o A Viva -Voce examinatio n is conducted during II/IV Semesters 
(Presentation followed by question -answer session) and the 
prescribed credit shall be included in the VIII semester grade card. 
 
11.5.1.2 Industry Internship  
● All the students admitted to engineering programs shall have to undergo 
Industrial Internship of 04 weeks during the second and third year of their 
Engineering studies. 
● During the intervening period of the IV & V semesters and VI & VII 
semesters, students shall be ready for industrial experience. Therefore, 
they shall choose to undergo 4 weeks Internship involving Innovation / 
Entrepreneurship or at Industry appropriate to the Decipline with the 
approval of respective HODs. 
  

=== PAGE 31 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 19   
11.5.2 Capstone Project work/Professional practice evaluation: The evaluation of CIE 
of the project work shall be based on the progress of the student in the work assigned 
by the project supervisor, periodically evaluated by him/her together with a 
department com mittee constituted for this purpose. Seminar presentation, project 
report, and final oral examination conducted by the project evaluation committee at 
the department level shall form the SEE of the project work. 
11.5.2.1 In the case of other requirements, such as s eminar, field work, or 
comprehensive viva voce, if any, the assessment shall be made as laid down 
by the DUGC with the approval of BOS and Academic council. 
11.5.2.2 There shall be no re-examination for any course in the credit system. 
 However, re-registration and examination is permitted for students 
● who have abstained from attending CIE or SEE without valid reasons 
(“N” grade), or 
● who have failed (‘F’ grade) to meet the minimum passing standards 
prescribed for CIE and/or SEE  or 
● who have been detained for shortage of attendance or who have 
withdrawn (W grade) who have dropped any course shall be required to 
re-register for such cour se(s) and go through CIE and SEE again and 
obtain a grade equal to or better than “P” Grade in each case.   
● While such students should re -register for the same course(s) if core, 
they can re-register for the alternative course(s) from among the elective 
courses, as the case may be. The re -registration shall be possible when 
the particular course is offered again either in a main (Odd/Even) or 
summer semester. 
 
11.6 Qualifying Standards 
Evaluation Method Qualifying Standard 
 Continuous Internal Evaluation Score: ≥ 50% (≥ 30 out of 60 marks) 
 Semester End Examination Score: ≥ 40% (≥ 16 out of 40 marks) 
For securing a final Pass in a course 
 
Total 50 % of the Course maximum marks (100) 
to be scored i.e., the sum of the CIE and SEE marks 
prescribed. 
A student shall be declared fail if he/she 
i. Has not satisfied the CIE requirements of any Course(s). 
ii.  Has not appeared for the SEE even after satisfying the attendance and   CIE 
requirements. 
 
11.7 Grading System  
The letter grade awarded to a student for his/her performance in a course is based on Absolute 
Grading.  
a. Absolute Grading – Letter Grade and its range 
The grade point scale for absolute grading 
  

=== PAGE 32 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 20   
Marks 
Range 
(%) 
Grade 
Point 
Letter 
Grade Descriptor 
 
CGPA  Classification 
90 & 
above 10 O Outstanding  
7.00-& above  First Class  
with Distinction 80-89 9 A+ Excellent 
70-79 8 A Very Good 
60-69 7 B+ Good 6.00-6.99 First Class 
55-59 6 B Above 
Average 
5.00-5.99 Second Class 50-54 5 C Average 
00-49 0 F Fails 
Absent 0 Ab Absent  
 
i) Grade “N”: A candidate having a shortage of attendance (<75%) in any course(s) or CIE 
marks less than 50% shall not be allowed to appear for SEE of such course(s). Such 
students will be awarded an ‘N’ grade in these courses with a grade point of 0. 
ii) The grade points given above help in the evaluation of credit points earned by the student 
in a course as the cr edit points are equal to the number of credits assigned to the course 
multiplied by the grade points awarded to the student in that course. This shall be used in 
Arriving at the credit index of the student for that semester, as it is the total of all the credit 
points earned by the student for all the courses registered in that semester. 
 
11.8 Earning of Credits 
A student shall be considered to have completed a course successfully and earned the credits if 
he/she secures an acceptable letter grade in the range of O-P. The letter grade “F” in any course 
implies the failure of the student in that course and no credits earned. 
a. The Transitional Grades “I”, “W” and “X” would be awarded by the teachers in the 
following cases. These would be converted into one or the other of the letter grades (O-F) 
after the student completes the course requirements. 
b. Grade “I”: To a student having attendance ≥85% and CIE ≥70% (35 marks), in a course, 
but remained absent from SEE for valid & convincing reasons acceptable to the Co llege, 
like: 
i. Illness or accident, which disabled him/her from attending SEE. 
ii. A calamity in the family at the time of SEE required the student to be away from the 
College. 
iii. However, the committee chaired by the principal is authorized to relax the 
requirement of CIE ≥ 70% if the student is hospitalized or advised long-term rest after 
discharge from the hospital by the Doctor.  
iv. Students who remain absent for Semester End Examinations due to valid reasons and 
those who are absent due to health reasons are requi red to submit the necessary 
documents along with their request to the Controller of Examinations to write Makeup 

=== PAGE 33 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 21   
Examinations within 2 working days of that examination for which he or she is absent, 
failing which they will not be given permission.  
c. Grade “W”: To a student having satisfactory attendance at classes, but withdrawing from 
that course before the prescribed date in a semester under Faculty Advice 
d. Grade “X”: To a student having attendance ≥85% and CIE ≥70%, in a course but SEE 
performance could result in an ‘F’ grade in the course. (No ‘F’ grade will be awarded in 
this case, but the student’s performance record is maintained separately). 
 
11.9 Summer / Fast Track semester 
a. The students who have satisfied CIE and Attendance requirements for the course/s and 
obtained an ‘F’ grade in SEE are permitted to appear directly in ensuing examination/s as 
backlog paper/s. The students need not re -register for such course/s in the summer / fast 
track semester. In case the student wishes to improve CIE/ he/she has to re-register for the 
summer / regular semester as and when offered next. 
b. The student who obtains required attendance and CIE in the summer semester, but obtains 
an 'F' grade in SEE; is permitted to appear for SEE subsequently as backlog course/s. The 
student need not repeat the course for Attendance and CIE. 
c. The course/s for which the student does not possess satisfactory attendance and CIE score 
shall be marked as ‘N’ on the Grade sheet. Such students are not permitted to SEE for the 
Courses marked as ‘N’ on the Grade sheet. The students have to re-register only for course/s 
marked as ‘N’ in the summer/ subsequent semester whenever that course is offered and 
obtain the required CIE and attendance. Subsequently, they are eligible to appear for SEE 
in such course/s. 
d. Courses with Transitional Grades viz "W”, "I", and "X" are also eligible to register in the 
summer semester in case they wish to improve their score in CIE. 
e. All courses may not be offered in the summer semester. It is the discretion of the University 
to offer the courses based on the availability of resources. The Institutes shall notify 
timetable for the summer semester well in advance. 
f. Summer Semester is optional; it is for the student to make the best use of the opportunity.  
g. A student is permitted to register for a maximum of 16 credits in the Summer / fast track 
semester. 
h. A student has to choose those courses which are offered by the Institution in a given summer 
Semester. 
i. In the summer semester, each course needs to be offered for the required number of lectures/ 
tutorial/ laboratory hours as prescribed in the syllabus. 
 
11.10  Grade Card 
Each student shall be issued a Grade Card at the end of each semester. This will have a list of 
all the courses registered by a student in the semester, together with their credits, the letter 
grades with grade points awarded. Only those courses registered  for credit and having grade 
points shall be included in the computation of the students’ performance like SGPA and CGPA 
and the courses taken for audit will not form part of this computation. The results of mandatory 
courses, which are of the non -credit type, shall also be reflected in the Grade card as PP (for 
Passed) or NP (for not passed). Each UG student shall have to obtain the grade PP in each 
mandatory course to qualify for the Degree awarded by the university. 

=== PAGE 34 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 22   
 
11.11   Re-evaluation and paper seeing. 
Re-evaluation is permitted only for theory papers. The University, on receiving application 
within the stipulated time and remittance of a prescribed fee for re-evaluation, shall permit re-
evaluation for the course/s applied. The marks obtained after re -evaluation shall be the final 
marks awarded.  
 
11.12   The Make-Up Examination 
The Make -Up Examination facility would be available to students who may have missed 
attending the SEE of one or more course(s) in a semester for valid reasons and given the “I” 
grade; Also, students having the “X” grade shall be eligible to take advantage of this facility. 
The makeup examination would be held as per dates notified in the Academic Calendar 
during the summer semester. However, it would be possible to hold a makeup examination 
at any other time in the semester with the permission of the Academic Council of the College.  
In all these cases, the standard of makeup examinations shall be the same as the regular SEE 
for the course(s). 
a) All the “I” and “X” grades awarded to the students would be converted to appropriate letter 
grades after the make-up examinations. Any outstanding “I” and “X” grades after the last 
scheduled make-up examinations shall be automatically converted to “F” grades. 
b) All the “W” grades awarded to the students would be eligible for conversion to the 
appropriate letter grades only after the concerned students re -register for these courses in 
a main/ Summer semester and fulfill the passing standards for their CIE and (CIE+SEE). 
 
11.13     Rules for grace marks 
Grace marks up to 1% of the maximum total marks of the courses for which he/she is eligible 
and have registered (non-credit courses excluded) in the examination or 10 marks whichever 
is less shall be awarded to the failed course(s), (with a restriction of a maximum of 5 marks 
per course) provided on the award of such grace marks the candidate passes in that course(s) 
 
12. EVALUATION OF PERFORMANCE 
The overall performance of a student will be indicated by two indices: 
SGPA; which is the Semester Grade Point Average, and CGPA which is the Cumulative Grade 
Point Average. 
SGPA for a semester is computed as follows. 
 
𝑆𝐺𝑃𝐴 = ∑ [(𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑠𝑒 𝐶𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑠) × (𝐺𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡)] (𝑓𝑜𝑟 𝑎𝑙𝑙 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑠𝑒𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑡ℎ𝑎𝑡 𝑠𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟)
∑ [𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑠𝑒 𝐶𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑠]  
 
CGPA is computed as follows: 
𝐶𝐺𝑃𝐴
=
∑ [(𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑠𝑒 𝐶𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑠) × (𝐺𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡)] (𝑓𝑜𝑟 𝑎𝑙𝑙 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑠𝑒𝑠 𝑒𝑥𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑡ℎ𝑜𝑠𝑒 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 
𝐹 𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑠 𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙 𝑡ℎ𝑎𝑡 𝑠𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟) 
∑ [𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑠𝑒 𝐶𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑠] (𝑓𝑜𝑟 𝑎𝑙𝑙 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑠𝑒𝑠 𝑒𝑥𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑡ℎ𝑜𝑠𝑒 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝐹 𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑠 𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙 𝑡ℎ𝑎𝑡 𝑠𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟) 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 35 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 23   
13. COMMUNICATION OF GRADES 
The SGPA and CGPA respectively, facilitates the declaration of academic performance of a student 
at the end of a semester and the end of successive semesters.  Both would be normally calculated to 
the second decimal position. 
 
14. REQUIREMENTS FOR VERTICAL PROGRESSION  
(PROMOTION / ELIGIBILITY TO HIGHER SEMESTERS) 
 
14.1. A student must have passed all the courses of I and II semesters to progress from IV semester 
to V semester. 
14.2. A student must have passed all the courses of III and IV semesters to progress from VI 
semester to VII semester. 
14.3. Lateral entry student must have passed all the courses of III and IV semesters to progress 
from VI semester to VII semester. 
 
14.4. Termination from the program 
A student shall be required to withdraw (discontinue) from the program and leave the 
college on the following grounds. 
14.4.1. Failure to secure a minimum CGPA of 5.0 at the end of the 8 years (6 years for lateral 
entry students). 
14.4.2. Failure to earn 165 credits (123 /121 as applicable for lateral entry students) in 8 years 
(6 years for lateral entry students) of duration from the year of admission including the 
duration of temporary withdrawal (leave of absence). 
14.4.3. Absence from classes for more than six weeks at a time in a semester without leave of 
absence being granted by competent authorities. 
14.4.4. Failure to meet the standards of discipline as prescribed by the college from time  to 
time. 
 
15. AWARD OF CLASS 
Sometimes, it would be necessary to provide equivalence of these averages, viz., SGPA and CGPA 
with the percentages and/or classes awarded as in the conventional system of declaring the results 
of university examinations. This can be done by prescribing certain specific threshol ds in these 
averages for Distinction, First Class and Second Class. This can be seen in the following Table. 
 
Percentage Equivalence of Grade Points (For a 10-Point Scale) 
Grade Point Percentage of Marks* Class 
≥ 7.00 ≥ 70% First class with Distinction 
≥ 6.00 ≥ 60% First Class 
5.0 ≤ CGPA < 6.00 50 ≤ Percentage < 60% Second Class 
Percentage * = (CGPA) x 10 
  

=== PAGE 36 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 24   
16. APPEAL FOR REVIEW OF GRADES 
16.1. The entire process of evaluation shall be made transparent, and the course instructor shall 
explain to a student why he/she gets whatever grade he/she is awarded, if and when 
required. A mechanism for the review of grades is incorporated into the evaluation system. 
However, before appealing for such review, a student shall first approach the concerned 
course Instructor and then the concerned DUGC, with the request to do the needful; and 
only in situations where satisfactory remedial measures have not been take n, the student 
may then appeal to the Department Academic Appeals Boards (DAAB) before the date 
specified in Academic Calendar, by paying the prescribed fees. 
16.2. The fee for such an appeal will be decided by the Senate from time to time. If the appeal is 
upheld by DAAB, then the fee amount will be refunded to the student. 
 
17. AWARD OF DEGREE 
17.1 B.Tech. Degree 
a) Students shall be declared to have completed the Program of B.Tech. degree and is eligible 
for the award of degree provided the students have undergone the stipulated Course work 
of all the semesters under the Scheme of Teaching and Examinations and have earned the 
prescribed number of credits (165 credits for regular students registered for 4-year degree 
programs & 123/121 as applicable for lateral entry students). 
b) For the award of a degree, a CGPA ≥ 5.00 at the end of the Program shall be mandatory. 
c) Completion of two Bridge courses in Mathematics shall be mandatory for the award of 
degree to lateral entry diploma students. 
d) Earning of Activity Points:  
i. As per the AICTE Activity Point Program, every student entering the degree 
program should earn activity points as shown, for the award of engineering degree. 
Sl.No. Student Category Activity based 
points prescribed 
1 Regular students admitted to the B. Tech  
degree program in the first year 
   100 
2 Lateral entry students admitted to the B.Tech 
degree program in the second year 
    75 
3 Students transferred from other Universities         
to (i) to 3rd semester 
(ii) to 5th semester 
 
    75  
    50 
ii. The activities can be spread over the years (duration of the program) at any time 
during the semester weekends and holidays, as per the interest & convenience of the 
students from the year of entry to the program. 
iii. The Activity Points earned shall be reflected on the student’s eighth-semester Grade 
Card. 
iv. Activity Points (non-credit) do not affect SGPA/CGPA and shall not be considered 
for vertical progression. 
v. In case students fail to earn the prescribed activity Points before the commencement 
of 8th-semester examinations, the eighth-semester Grade Card shall be issued only 
after earning the required activity Points. Students shall be admitte d for the award 
of a degree only after the release of the Eighth semester Grade Card. 

=== PAGE 37 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 25   
17.2 Honours/ Minors Degree 
17.2.1 B.Tech. (Honours) Degree 
i. Students must earn a minimum of 18 additional credits in his/her major program 
discipline entitles a student to get an ‘Honours’ credential. 
ii. Students have to pay additional fees for all the courses registered for ‘Honours’ 
iii. Students with a minimum of 7.5 CGPA and no backlog at the end of the 4th 
semester will qualify for registering for courses under the ‘Honours credential. 
iv. Students shall register for ‘Honours’ courses from the 5th semester onwards. 
v. Students should register for additional courses and plan to take courses that are 
prescribed under that ‘Honours’ list as per ‘pre -requisite’ courses to earn the 
'Honours' credential. 
vi. Students who wish to acquire an ‘Honours’ credential need to carry out 
‘Honours’ course registration along with their regular semester course 
registration.  
vii. He/she accumulates credits by registering for the required courses, and if the 
requirements for ‘Honours’ are met within the prescribed minimum time limit 
of the program, the ‘Honours’ will be awarded along with the degree.  
viii. Also, the student should meet the following requirements to become eligible for 
the ‘Honours’ award. 
● Minimum CGPA of 7.5 in this major discipline at the end of the 8th semester  
● Minimum CGPA of 7.0 in the registered ‘Honours’ courses  
ix. In case a student withdraws from the ‘Honours’ registration in the middle of the 
program, the ‘Honours’ courses completed will be converted to ‘Audit’ courses 
and indicated accordingly in subsequent Grade Sheets and Consolidated Grade 
Sheets.  
x. It must be noted that the ‘Honours’ award will be mentioned in the Degree 
Certificate as “Bachelor of Technology in (specialization) with Honours”.  
xi. This fact will also be reflected in the Consolidated Grade Sheet under a separate 
heading ‘Honours’ with similar details shown for other credited courses and the 
CGPA for ‘Honours’ will be indicated at the end of the list of courses under 
‘Honours’.  
xii. The grades obtained in the courses credited towards the ‘Honours’ award is not 
counted and shall not influence the GPA/ CGPA of the ‘program’ student has 
registered. 
 
17.2.2 Minor Degree 
i. Students have to earn a min of 18 additional credits from the courses focused on 
discipline other than his/her major program discipline entitles a student to get a 
‘Minor’ credential. 
ii. Students have to pay additional fees for all the courses registered for ‘Minor’. 
iii. Students with a minimum of 5.0 CGPA and no backlog at the end of the 3rd  
semester will only qualify for registering for the course under the ‘Minor’ 
credential.  
iv. Students shall register for ‘Minor’ degree courses from the 4th semester 
onwards. 
  

=== PAGE 38 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 26   
 
v. All Departments will offer ‘Minors’ in their varied disciplines and will prescribe 
what set of courses and/or projects is necessary for earning a minor in that 
discipline. 
vi. Students should register for additional courses and plan to take courses that are 
prescribed under that ‘Minors’ list as per ‘pre -requisite’ courses to earn the 
'Minor' credential.  
vii. If any of the courses listed under the ‘minor’ option is a course listed under 
his/her curriculum as PCC then the student cannot opt for that ‘Minor’, since all 
minor courses need to be earned as additional courses to his/her program 
curriculum and depts decision is final and binding. 
viii. Students who wish to acquire a ‘Minor’ can register for ‘Minor’ courses along 
with their regular semester course registration.  
ix. Also, the student should have a minimum CGPA of 5.0 in the ‘Minor’ courses 
registered to become eligible for the Minor credential. This fact will also be 
reflected in the Consolidated Grade Sheet under a separate heading ‘Minor in 
(specialization)’.  
x. If the course requirements for a particular ‘Minor’ are met within the prescribed 
minimum time limit of the program, the minor will be awarded along with the 
degree, and it will be mentioned in the Degree Certificate as “Bachelor of 
Technology in (Major discipline) with Minor in (specialization).” 
xi. In case a student withdraws from the ‘Minor’, the ‘Minor’ courses completed, 
will be converted to ‘Audit’ courses and indicated accordingly in subsequent 
Grade Sheets and Consolidated Grade Sheets. 
xii. The grades obtained in the courses credited towards the ‘Minor’ award are not 
counted and shall not influence the GPA/ CGPA of the program the student has 
registered for. 
17.2.3 Additional norms for Honours/Minors 
i. Students shall register for additional courses to earn Honours/Minors in 
consultation with their Class Advisor from the list of courses suggested by the 
DUGC. 
ii. DUGC may recommend Massive Open Online Courses 
(MOOCs)/SWAYAM/NPTEL courses to students who wish to register for 
Honours/Minors after justifying and establishing the equivalence of the curriculum. 
The decision of DUGC should be commu nicated to the Dean of Academics and 
Controller of Examinations for seeking approval. 
iii. The credits prescribed for Honors/Minors may be earned through 
SWAYAM/NPTEL 
iv. Students may choose to take up additional course work, from the MOOCs courses 
list suggested by various departments (which can be from SWAYAM/NPTEL) with 
proctored examinations as approved by the University and complete the same 
before the last working day of the VIII semester with a final score (online 
assignments: 25 % + Proctored examination: 75  %) leading to the following 
certificates: Completed the course (40 -59)– ELITE (60 to 75 %) or ELITE + 
SILVER (76 to 89 %) or ELITE + GOLD ( ≥ 90 %)  

=== PAGE 39 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 27   
v. In case, there is no proctored examination for SWAYAM/NPTEL Courses, the 
University will conduct a SEE as deemed to be fit for the award of Credits 
vi. The Credit equivalence for online courses shall be as follows – 
● 4 weeks of online course duration – 1 credit (approx. 13-14 hours) 
● 8 weeks of online course duration – 2 credits (approx. 26-28 hours) and  
● 12 weeks of online course duration – 3 credits (approx. 39-42 Hours) 
 
17.2.4 Examination for Swayam Courses  
a) Students are advised to check well in advance the availability of SWAYAM 
courses to be enrolled in the SWAYAM portal ( Ref: Notification of Registrar 
N(DU)/REG/AC/2024-25/1040) 
b) Students must complete the entire SWAYAM course and submit a minimum of 
75% of assignments and quizzes to be eligible for the end-term examination 
c)  End-term proctored examinations for all SWAYAM -based credit courses are 
conducted by the National Testing Agency (NTA) and National Programme on 
Technology Enhanced Learning (NPTEL) at their designated centers across the 
country. 
d) Alternatively, for select  courses, the university will conduct end -term 
examinations during the current semester in alignment with the regular academic 
calendar. These exams will be conducted in accordance with the UGC's framework 
to facilitate learning on SWAYAM. 
e) The end -term exa mination will carry 70 -75% weightage, while continuous 
assessments consisting of assignments and quizzes completed on the SWAYAM 
portal will carry 25-30% weightage depending on the evaluation plan announced 
by SWAYAM course coordinators. 
f) Completion certificate from SWAYAM must be submitted within the first week 
of commencement of respective semesters.  
g) Re-examinations will be conducted in the subsequent two semesters for students 
who could not pass or appear in the end-term exams. 
 
17.3 Noncompliance  
17.3.1 Noncompliance with Capstone Project/Professional Practice 
The Capstone Project/Professional Practice shall be considered as a head of passing 
and shall be considered for the award of degree. Those, who do not take up/complete 
the Capstone Project/Professional Practice shall have to complete the same during 
subsequent University examinations after satisfying the Capstone Project/Professional 
Practice requirements.  
17.3.2 Noncompliance of Internship 
All the students of B. Tech shall have to undergo mandatory Internship-for 4 weeks to 
earn 4 credits during the vacations at the end of the 2/3 academic year. The evaluation 
of Internship shall be during VIII semester. The internship shall be considered 
mandatory for the award of a degree. Those, who do not take up/complete the internship 
shall have to complete the same during subsequent University examinations after 
satisfying the internship requirements. 
 

=== PAGE 40 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 28   
The maximum duration for a student for complying with the Degree requirements is 
16 – semesters from the date of first registration for his/ her first semester (8 years from 
the date of admission to the first year, (12 semesters / 6 years from the date of admission 
for lateral entry student)). 
 
18. GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS AND CONVOCATION 
18.1 A student shall be declared to be eligible for the award of the degree if he/she has 
a) Fulfilled “Award of Degree” Requirements 
b) No Dues to the College, Departments, Hostels, Library, Central Computer Centre and any 
other centers 
c) No disciplinary action is pending against him/her. 
18.2 Students shall be admitted for the award of the degree only after the release of the Eighth 
Semester Grade Card. 
18.3 The award of the degree must be recommended by the Executive Council. 
18.4 Convocation: Degree will be awarded to the students who have graduated du ring the 
preceding academic year. Students are required to apply for the Convocation along with the 
prescribed fees, after having satisfactorily completed all the degree requirements (refer to 
“Award of Degree‟) within the specified date to arrange for the  award of the degree during 
convocation. 
 
 
19. AWARD OF PRIZES, MEDALS, CLASS & RANKS 
19.1 For the award of Prizes and Medals, the conditions stipulated by the Donor may be considered 
as per the statutes framed by the University for such awards. Sometimes, it would be necessary 
to provide equivalence of these averages, viz., SGPA and CGPA with the percentages and/or 
Class awarded as in the conventional system of declaring the results of university 
examinations. This can be done by prescribing certain specific thresholds in these averages for 
Distinction, First Class, and Second Class as described in Section 15. 
19.2 An attempt means the appearance/registration of a candidate for an examination in one or more 
courses either in part or failing a particular examination. 
a. A candidate who fails/remains absent (after submitting exam application) in the main 
examination and passes one or more subjects/courses or all subjects/courses in the summer 
/ Make-up examination shall be considered as taken more than an attempt. 
19.3 Merit Certificates and University Medals/ will be awarded based on overall CGPA, governed 
by the specific selection criteria that may be formulated by the University for such Medals / 
Awards 
a. Only those candidates who have completed the Program and fulfilled all the requirements 
in the minimum number of years prescribed (i.e., 3 years for Diploma lateral entry students 
or 4 years for students who joined after the 12 th standard) and who have passed each 
semester in the first attempt  are eligible for th e award of Merit Certificates and /or 
University Medals.  
 
 

=== PAGE 41 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 29   
b. Candidates with W, N, I, X & F grades and who passes the courses in the subsequent 
summer /make up examinations are not eligible for the award of Gold Medal or Merit 
Certificate. 
 
20. CONDUCT AND DISCIPLINE 
20.1 Students shall conduct themselves within and outside the premises of the College in a manner 
befitting the students of an Institution of National Importance. 
20.2 As per the order of the Honorable Supreme Court of India, ragging in any form is 
considered a criminal offense and is banned. Any form of ragging will be severely dealt 
with. 
20.3 The following acts of omission/ or commission shall constitute a gross violation of the Code 
of Conduct and are liable to invoke disciplinary measures: 
i. Ragging. 
ii. Lack of courtesy and decorum; indecent behavior anywhere within or outside the 
campus. 
iii. Willful damage or stealthy removal of any property/be longings of the 
College/Hostel or fellow students/citizens. 
iv. Possession, consumption, or distribution of alcoholic drinks or any kind of 
hallucinogenic drugs. 
v. Mutilation or unauthorized possession of Library books. 
vi.   Noisy and unseemly behavior, disturbing studies of fellow students. 
vii. Hacking in computer systems (such as entering into another Person’s area without 
prior permission, manipulation and/or Damage of computer hardware and 
software, or any other Cybercrime, etc.). 
viii. Plagiarism of any nature. 
ix. Any other act of gross indiscipline as decided by the Senate from time to time. 
x. Use of Mobile in the college Academic area. 
xi. Smoking in College Campus and use of any Tobacco products. 
xii. Unauthorized fundraising and promoting sales. 
xiii. Commensurate with the gravity of the offense the punishment may be: reprimand, 
expulsion from the hostel, debarring from an examination, disallowing the use of 
certain facilities of the College, rustication for a specified period or even outright 
expulsion from the College, or even handing over the case to appropriate law 
enforcement authorities or the judiciary, as required by the circumstances. 
20.4 For an offense committed in (i) a hostel (ii) a department or a classroom and (iii) elsewhere, 
the Chief Warden, the Head of the Department, and the Dean (Academics), respectively, 
shall have the authority to reprimand or impose fine. 
20.5 All cases involving punishment other than reprimand shall be reported to the Head of the 
Institution. 
20.6 Cases of adoption of unfair means and/or any malpractice in an examination shall be reported 
to the Controller of Examinations for taking appropriate action.  
20.7 Note: Students are required to be inside the examination hall 20 minutes before the 
commencement of the examination . This is applicable for all examinations (Semester end 
summer /makeup) henceforth. Students will not be allowed inside the examination hall after 
the commencement, under any circumstances. 

=== PAGE 42 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 30   
21. Pursuing Two Academic Programs 
21.1. Nitte (Deemed to be University) per mits students to pursue two academic programs 
simultaneously, in alignment with the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 and the UGC's 
guidelines (Ref: Notification of Registrar N(DU)/REG/AC/2024-25/1039) 
21.2. Regulations and guidelines from statutory regulatory authorities will take precedence over 
these regulations, any updates or amendments to the regulatory guidelines will be 
incorporated into the university's regulations as required. 
21.3. The university reserves the right to amend these regulations as required. 
21.3.1. Eligibility 
● Students are permitted to pursue a second academic program of the same qualification level 
– i.e., undergraduate students can enrol for a second undergraduate level program and post-
graduate students can enrol for another post-graduate level program. 
● Students may enrol for the second program at Nitte (Deemed to be University) or any other 
recognized university. 
● PhD students are not permitted to pursue any other academic program along with their 
PhD. 
21.3.2. Modes of Learning: 
● The second program may be pursued in -person, online, or through Open and 
Distance Learning (ODL) mode. 
● Students must seek prior written approval from Nitte (Deemed to be University) 
before enrolling in the second academic program. 
● The application for approval must in clude details of the second program and its 
alignment with the student's primary program of study. 
● A student can pursue two full time academic programmes in physical mode 
provided that in such cases, class timings for one programme do not overlap with 
the class timings of the other program. 
● Degree or diploma programmes under ODL/Online mode shall be pursued with 
only such HEIs which are recognized by UGC/Statutory Council/Govt. of India for 
running such programmes. 
**********  

=== PAGE 43 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 31   
APPENDIX - A 
Definitions, terminology, and abbreviations 
1. Nitte DU / University 
a. Refers to Nitte (Deemed to be University) 
2. EC 
a. Refers to Executive Council of Nitte (Deemed to be University) 
3. BoS 
a. Refers to the Board of Studies in appropriate Branches of Engineering  
4. Institute/Institution 
a. Refers to NMAM Institute of Technology, Nitte / Nitte Meenakshi Institute of 
Technology, Bangalore 
5. Program 
a. A range of learning experiences over a specified period, leading to the award of a 
degree/diploma/certificate. A program is completed when the courses that make up 
the program are completed, and other requirements as specified in the program 
regulations are met. 
6. Course 
a. A unit of learning that typically lasts one semester, led by one or more teachers, for a 
fixed roster of students. Often referred to as a “subject”. A course has identified course 
outcomes, modules/units of study, specified teaching -learning methods, and 
assessment schemes. A course may be designed to include lectures, tutorials, practical, 
laboratory work, fieldwork, project work, internship experiences, seminars, self-study 
components, online learning modules, etc. in any combination. 
7. Semester 
a. An academic session, usually of 16 weeks duration, with a minimum of 90 working 
days during which coursework and assessments are to be completed. Typically, two 
semesters make up an academic year, with the first of these referred to as the Odd 
Semester and the second as the Even Semester. 
b. An additional short semester (usually 8 weeks) may be offered between an even 
semester and subsequent odd semester (in the interval between two academic years) 
and is termed a summer semester. The summer semester is offered to enable students 
to register for: 
i. Fast-tracked courses required for clearing backlog courses. 
ii. Fast-tracked courses for earning additional credit / completing non -credit 
mandatory requirements. 
iii. Value added courses. 
iv. The courses offered in summer semesters are bound by the same regulations 
as that of regular semesters, except that they are run at an accelerated pace to 
provide the required contact hours and conduct assessments within the 8 
weeks. 
  

=== PAGE 44 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 32   
8. Credit 
a. A unit by which the course work is measured. It determines the number of hours of 
formal learning (contact hours) required per week. Credits are calculated based on the 
concept of “notional learning time”. Notional learning time is the number of hours that 
a learner is expected to spend, on average, to achieve the specified learning outcomes 
of the course. This may comprise a variable combination of scheduled learning 
activities, (lectures, seminars, labs, etc.) and supervised learning time (reading 
required before classes, working on assignments, examin ation preparation, and 
completion of assessments). 
9. Credit equivalence of notional learning time for different types of activities 
a. The credit values assigned to various teaching-learning activities are as follows: 
Type of teaching-
learning 
Nature 
of 
activity 
No. of contact 
hours per week 
equivalent to 
one credit 
The total number of 
contact hours over a 16-
week semester is 
equivalent to one credit 
Lectures / Seminars / 
synchronous virtual 
classes / synchronous 
webinars 
Scheduled 
instruction 1:1 15 
Tutorials Scheduled 
instruction 2:1 30 
Supervised 
Demonstrations 
/Laboratory sessions / 
Studio / Workshops / 
Workplace simulation / 
Skill Practice Sessions 
Scheduled 
instruction 
2:1 30 
Supervised Field 
visits/community 
visits/Internships 
Scheduled 
instruction 3:1 45 
Scheduled supervised 
study (individual or 
group) 
Scheduled 
instruction 2:1 30 
Asynchronous E -
Learning modules 
(structured self -
directed study 
Independent 
learning 2:1 30 
Student Seminar Independent
/small group 
learning 
2:1 30 
Project 
work/dissertation 
Independent
/small group 
learning 
3:1 45 
Internship for credit Industry 
placement/ 
Research 
Internship 
3:1 40-45 
 
  

=== PAGE 45 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 33   
10. Choice-based credit system (CBCS) 
A program structure for higher education requires students to earn a minimum of credits by 
completing various types of courses, including electives, which facilitate a student to have 
some freedom in selecting his/her own choices, within as well as across disciplines. 
11. Course Registration 
Refers to formal registration of the Courses in the study every semester (Credits and Audit) 
by every student under the supervision of a faculty advisor. The institution will maintain 
records of the same and communicate them to the University. 
12. Learning outcomes 
a. Program Outcomes (PO) - Statements defining the skills, knowledge, and attitude that 
graduates of a program will be able to demonstrate upon completing the program. 
b. Course Outcomes (CO) - Statements defining the skills, knowledge, and attitude that 
students will be able to demonstrate upon completing the course. COs are mapped to the 
POs such that attaining the course outcomes leads to the attainment of program outcomes.  
c. Attainment of COs are mapped to POs such that attaining the course outcomes leads to 
the attainment of program outcomes 
 
13. Evaluation 
For all courses, the evaluation will be based on both formative assessment (Continuous 
Internal Evaluation, CIE) and summative assessment (Semester End Examination, SEE). 
Weightage for CIE and SEE will be 60% and 40% respectively. 
13.1 Continuous Internal Evaluation (CIE) 
Refers to the periodic and continuous formative assessment of students' performance 
during the semester b y the teacher(s) of the course to provide timely feedback to 
students and for guiding “course corrections” by the teachers. The assessment methods 
may include tests, quizzes, assignments, project evaluations, portfolio evaluations, 
seminar assessments, etc. CIE will have a weightage of 60% in the determination of 
the final grading of the course. 
13.2 Semester End Examination (SEE) 
Refers to a summative assessment that covers the entire course syllabus, conducted by 
the University, at the end of the semester. App ropriate assessment methods aligned 
with the learning domain and teaching-learning methods are to be used. SEE will have 
a weightage of 40% in the determination of the final grading of the course. 
14. Grading 
Course Grade refers to a qualitative measure of performance of a student in each course, 
based on the percentage of marks secured in Continuous Internal Evaluation (CIE) and 
Semester End Evaluation (SEE). A Letter grade is awarded for each course.  
  

=== PAGE 46 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 34   
15. Semester Grade Point Average (SGPA) 
Refers to the measure of a student’s academic performance in a semester. It is calculated 
based on the credits and the grades obtained in the courses offered in the semester. 
16. Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) 
Refers to the measure of the cumulative performance of a student in all the previous semesters 
and is computed from the 2nd semester onwards. It is calculated based on the credits and the 
grades obtained in all the courses taken. 
17. Academic Bank of Credits (ABC) 
The Academic Bank of Credits is a national-level facility for “credit transfer”. It is provided 
by the Ministry of Education, Govt. of India, to promote the flexibility of the curriculum 
framework and interdisciplinary/multidisciplinary academic mobility of stu dents across the 
Higher Education Institutions in the country. The banking and redemption of credits through 
ABC will be governed by the University’s guidelines. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

=== PAGE 47 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 35   
APPENDIX-B 
Evaluation Guidelines 
CIE and SEE details for various types of courses  
1. Theory: PCC/IPCC/PEC/OEC 
1.1. Scheme of examinations: CIE + SEE = 60 + 40 = 100 marks  
1.2. Continuous internal evaluation (CIE): 
1.2.1.  CIE (PCC/PEC/OEC) 
Type of Questions Questions to be set 
(Can have sub-
questions a and b) 
Questions to 
Be answered 
Marks per 
question 
Total 
marks 
Mid Sem Exam-1  
40-50 % of the total syllabus  
Descriptive Part-1 2 1 10 10 
Descriptive Part-2 2           1 10 10 
Mid Sem Exam-2  
40-50% of the total syllabus  
Descriptive Part-1 2 1 10 10 
Descriptive Part-2 2 1 10 10 
Participative Learning: Learning Activity/TASK 
Learning Activities The Learning Activities/Task comprises class 
tests/quizzes/assignments conducted for all 5 
units/modules each for a max mark of 20. The final task 
mark is based on the average of all 5 assessments,  
All tests/quizzes/Assignments are compulsory. 
20 
Maximum Marks 60 
 
  

=== PAGE 48 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 36   
1.2.2 CIE (IPCC/PBL) 
Type of Questions Questions to be set 
(Can have sub-
questions a and b) 
Questions 
to be 
answered 
Marks per 
question 
Total 
marks 
Mid Sem Exam-1  
40-50 % of the total syllabus 
Descriptive Part-1 2 1 10 10 
Descriptive Part-2 2 1 10 10 
Mid Sem Exam-2  
40-50 % of the total syllabus 
Descriptive Part-1 2 1 10 10 
Descriptive Part-2 2 1 10 10 
Learning Activities The learning activity comprises class 
tests/quizzes/assignments conducted for all 5 
units/modules each for a max mark of 20. The final task 
mark is based on the average of all 5 assessments,  
All tests/quizzes/Assignments are compulsory. 
20 
Maximum Marks (A) 60 
Minimum Eligibility 50% of Maximum mark (A)=30 marks 
Practical/Project Based Learning (PBL) 
Practical/PBL Practical/PBL (comprises of implementation of 
theoretical concepts through projects/problem solving) 
60 
Maximum Marks (B) 60 
Minimum Eligibility 50% of Maximum mark (B) =30 marks 
Maximum CIE Marks 
[60% of Max marks (A) (Theory)+ 40% of Max marks (B) 
(Practical/PBL)]  
60 
 
  

=== PAGE 49 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 37   
1.2.3 Semester End Examination (SEE):  3 Hours Duration 
Type of 
Questions 
Module 
& 
Teaching hours 
Questions to 
be set 
Questions 
to be 
answered 
Marks per 
question Total 
marks 
MCQ 
Entire Syllabus 
20  
(4 questions 
from each 
unit/module) 
All 
Questions 1 20 
Type of 
Questions 
Module  
& 
Teaching hours 
Questions to 
be set (Can 
have sub-
questions a, b, 
and c) 
Questions 
to be 
answered 
Marks per 
question 
Total 
eligible 
max 
marks 
Descriptive  
 
● Unit-1  
● 7-8 teaching 
hours 
2 1 16 16 
Descriptive  ● Unit-2  
● 7-8 teaching 
hours 
2 1 16 16 
Descriptive    ● Unit-3  
● 7-8teaching 
hours 
2 1 16 16 
Descriptive ● Unit-4  
● 7-8 teaching 
hours 
2 1 16 16 
Descriptive ● Unit-5  
● 7-8 teaching 
hours 
2 1 16 16 
 Maximum 
Marks 
100 
Minimum SEE Marks to be scored out of 100 marks  40 
Minimum SEE Marks to be scored out of 40 marks  16 
 
  

=== PAGE 50 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 38   
1.2.4 CIE & SEE for various types of courses 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
 
 
Courses 
Evaluation Scheme 
CIE 
(Minimum 
eligibility marks 
50% of Max CIE 
marks to appear for 
SEE) 
SEE 
(Minimum eligibility 
marks 40 % of Max 
marks 
 
Total 
Marks= 
(CIE+ 
SEE) 
 
Require
ment 
for 
securing 
a final 
Pass 
(Letter 
Grade 
P) 
 
Max 
Marks 
Min 
eligibility 
marks 
50% of 
max 
marks 
Max 
Marks 
100 or 
50 
Minimum 
eligibility 
marks 
required 
 50 %    
marks          
(Aggreg
ate of 
CIE 
+SEE) 
40% 
of max 
marks 
Out of 
40 
marks 
 
1 
Integrated 
Professional 
Core Course 
(IPCC) 
Theory 60 30 
100 40 16 100 50 
Practical 60 30 
Total (60% of 
theory +40% of 
Lab) 
60 30 
2 PCC with PBL 
component 
Theory 60 30 
100 40 16 100 50 
PBL component 60 30 
Total (60% of 
theory +40% of 
PBL) 
60 30 
3 PCC/PEC/OEC 60 30 100 40 16 100 50 
4 Laboratory 60 30 50 20  16 100 50 
5 Community Engagement 100 50 - - 100 50 
6 
Internship 
Industry/Govt./ MSME/Research 
center =Total of 4 weeks) 
60 30 50 20 16 100 50 
7 
Capstone Project 
 
Research Internship/ Advanced 
Industry Internship/Project work 
120 60 80 32 - 200 100 
8 Professional Practice 180 90 120 48 - 300 150 
 
All university examinations (SEE) shall be conducted for  a maximum of 100 marks. For assigning the 
letter grade the university examination marks secured by a student, shall be reduced to 40 marks (except 

=== PAGE 51 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 39   
for serial no.4,5, 6,7 and 8) and added to CIE marks. The minimum marks for securing a passing grade 
‘C’ shall be 50% of the aggregate marks (CIE+ SEE). If the total marks result in a fraction during 
reduction, it shall be rounded off to the nearest higher value. 
2 Laboratory/Practical Course 
2.1 Split-up of Marks for evaluation of Practical for 60 CIE marks and 40 SEE marks. 
2.2 Split-up of Marks for evaluation of Laboratory work: 
2.2.1 Laboratory in -charge faculty will follow rubrics given in the Tables below for an 
evaluation of laboratory courses 
2.2.2 In the case of Practical, the CIE marks shall be based on laboratory observation, 
records, viva, and at least one practical test. 
2.2.3 Continuous Evaluation in every lab session will be done using the format mentioned in 
the Table to evaluate respective PO’s  
2.2.4 Rubrics used for Continuous Internal Evaluation of Laboratory Courses involving 
experiments with hardware 
 
Lab Conduction and Record Lab MSE 
Split-up: 50% (30 Marks) of Maximum CIE 
marks (60). 
Each experiment is to be evaluated for 
conduction with an observation book and record 
write-up (30 marks per experiment). The final 
marks for conduction and record are the average 
of all the specified experiments in the syllabus. 
Split-up: 50% (30 Marks) of Maximum 
CIE marks (60). One test of 30 Marks 
. 
Rubrics 
per 
experiment 
Marks 
Distribution 
 
Remarks Rubrics 
Marks 
Distribution Remarks 
Circuit 02 
Evaluation of 
Record write-up 
to include 
weightage for 
submission on 
time, neatness, 
etc. 
Write-up 05 
 
Design 02 Conduction & 
Viva 15 
Procedure 02 
 
 
 
Results  
 
 
 
10 
Conduction 06 
Viva 06 
Record 
write-up 12 
Total 
Marks 30 Total Marks 30 
 
 
  

=== PAGE 52 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 40   
2.2.5 Split-up of Marks used for continuous Evaluation of laboratory involving 
experiments with software (Sample for PCC) 
Rubrics for 
Split up of 
Marks 
Methodology / Process Steps per Experiment Marks 
 
#R1 
Observation, Write up of Procedure / Algorithm/ Program execution, 
and Conduction of experiment 15 
#R2 Viva – Voce  05 
#R3 Record writing 10 
 Total Marks for each experiment 30 
 
 
#R4 
Internal Test: Lab Internal Assessment 
(i) Write-up of Procedure/Program/Algorithm 
(ii) Conduction/Execution 
(iii) Viva-Voce 
 
05 
20 
05 
 Total Marks 30 
 
 
3. Internship and Evaluation 
3.1 Introduction 
The rise in global competition has prompted organizations to devise strategies to have a talented 
and innovative workforce to gain a competitive edge. Developing an internship policy is an 
impactful strategy for creating a future talent pool for the industry. The internship (a form of 
experiential learning) program not only helps fresh pass–outs in gaining professional know-how 
but also benefits corporate sectors. The internship also enhances the employability skills of the 
student passing out from Technical Institutions. 
The following list provides a brief illustrative overview of the knowledge, skills, work habits, 
and character traits commonly associat ed with 21 st-century skills and to be acquired by 
graduates: 
● Critical thinking, problem solving, reasoning, analysis, interpretation, and synthesizing 
information. 
● Scientific literacy and reasoning, the scientific method. 
● Research skills and practices, interrogative questioning. 
● Creativity, artistry, curiosity, imagination, innovation, and personal expression. 
● Information and communication technology (ICT) literacy, media and internet literacy, 
data interpretation and analysis, and computer programing. 
● Oral and written communication, public speaking and presenting, listening. 
● Economic and financial literacy, entrepreneurial skills. 
● Global awareness, multicultural literacy, humanitarianism. 
● Environmental and conservation literacy, ecosystems understanding. 
● Civic, ethical, and social-justice literacy. 

=== PAGE 53 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 41   
● Leadership, teamwork, collaboration, cooperation, and facility in using virtual 
workspaces. 
● Perseverance, self-direction, planning, self-discipline, adaptability, initiative. 
● Health and wellness literacy, includ ing nutrition, diet, exercise, and public health and 
safety. 
The internship experience will augment the outcome-based learning process and inculcate 
various attributes mentioned above in a student in line with the graduate attributes defined 
by the NBA as well as NEP 2020 
Following are the intended objectives of internship training. 
(i) Expose Technical students to the industrial environment, which cannot be simulated in the 
classroom, and hence create competent professionals in the industry. 
(ii) Provide possible o pportunities to learn, understand and sharpen the real -time 
technical/managerial skills required at the job. 
(iii) Expose to the current technological developments relevant to the subject area of training. 
(iv) Use the experience gained from the industrial internship in discussions held in the 
classrooms. 
(v) Create conditions conducive to the quest for knowledge and its applicability on the job. 
(vi) Learn to apply technical knowledge in real industrial situations. 
(vii) Gain experience in writing reports on technical works/projects. 
(viii) Expose students to the engineer’s responsibilities and ethics. 
(ix) Familiarize with various materials, processes, products, and their applications along with 
relevant aspects of quality control and safety measures. 
(x) Promote academic, career, and/or personal development.  
(xi) Expose the students to future employers.  
(xii) Make students available to the industry for employment.  
(xiii) Understand the psychology of the workers and their habits, attitudes, and approach to 
problem-solving.  
(xiv) Understand the social, econom ic, and administrative considerations that influence the 
working environment of industrial organizations. 
 
3.2 Academic credit framework for the internship and project work  undergone as part of the 
B.Tech.  program. 
• A minimum of 16 credits to be earned through community engagement activities, 
Internship and Project work/ professional practice may be counted towards B. Tech. degree 
program. 
• Here, 1 credit is equivalent to a minimum of 40 -45 hours of work. Therefore, a full -time 
intern is expected to spend 40 - 45 hours per week on Internship/Training/Project work etc. 
This will result in about 640 to 720 hours of total internship and project duration for the B. 
Tech program. 
• To derive the benefits of an internship, it may be introduced in two stages of the B.Tech. 
program.  
• Internships may be full-time or part-time; they are full-time during the summer vacation 
and part-time during the academic session. The curriculum is flexible to adjust internship 

=== PAGE 54 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 42   
duration. Therefore, opportunities must be provided for e xperiences that cannot be 
anticipated when planning the course.  
• The departments have the flexibility to schedule internships, Project work, Seminars, etc. 
according to the availability of the opportunities. However, the suggested minimum 
requirement regarding Internship duration and credits are as given in Table -B1. 
Table-B1.  Suggested Credit Framework for Internship and Capstone Project. 
Table-B1 states that during the ongoing/ summer vacations after the 2nd Semester, students 
are required to be involved in Inter/ Intra Institutional community engagement activities as 
outlined in section 3.3 
3.3 Community Engagement  
While intra-activities are within the institution, inter-activities shall be between the concerned 
institution and neighboring institutions. Intra and Inter activities are the activities that are the 
Sl. 
No. 
Title Schedule Duration Activities Credits 
1 Community 
Engagement 
Ongoing First-year 
academic session/ 
Vacation of 2nd Semester/ 
vacation during 3rd 
semester (for lateral entry 
students) 
02 weeks 1) Social connect & Responsibility 
(15 hours lecture to be engaged 
during second semester) 
2) Activity based Internship to 
focus on the activities 
pertaining to Social Connect & 
Responsibility (1 week duration 
(40 - 45 hours) to be completed 
during the Vacation of 2 nd 
Semester/ vacation during 3rd 
semester (for lateral entry 
students) 
3) Award of credits in 8th semester 
02 
2 
 
Internship a) Summer vacation after 
4th Semester 
02-04 weeks Industrial/Govt./ NGO/ 
MSME/ Rural Internship/ 
Innovation / Entrepreneurship 
--- 
b) Summer vacation after 
6th Semester 
02-04 weeks Industrial/Govt./ NGO/ 
MSME/ Rural Internship/ 
Innovation / Entrepreneurship 
c) Total of a) and b) 
should be completed 
before the beginning of 
the 8th semester 
04 weeks Evaluation in 8th Semester 04 
3 Capstone 
Project work / 
Professional 
Practice 
7th Semester 3hours/week Capstone project phase 1 00 
8th Semester 16 weeks 
 
Professional Practice /Research 
Internship/ Capstone project 
phase 2 
10 
Report preparation and writing 
Total Credits 16 

=== PAGE 55 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 43   
impetus to learning techniques. It adds to the comprehensive growth of the mind and 
associated activities. 
As the students are on the verge of learning technical aspects and have a limited period of 
engagement, it is preferable to expose students to polygonal activities instead of one type of 
activity. Therefore, activities completed by the students shall not be one type of activity but 
can be few activities. In this regard, Intra and Inter -Institutional activities shall be completed 
under the supervision of a faculty on a self-learning basis. 
The faculty have to kindle the latent abilities of the students, encourage, guide, supervise and 
shape them to achieve the desired result. Therefore, a learning agenda in the form of specific 
learning objectives and outcomes shall be prepared before the start of community engagement. 
Whatever the activity/activities that are/are done under Intra and Inter-Institutional activities, 
should ignite the inquisitiveness to learn, enhance  the knowledge, thinking ability and 
imagination, planning, application of mind, execution ability, innovation attitude, listening 
and understanding, vocabulary, personal expression, public speaking, written communication, 
oral presentation of the subject matter, acquire leadership qualities and teamwork 
requirements, responsiveness, ethics, etc. 
 
3.3.1 Societal (Social) related activities 
Short-term internships (about 2 weeks) in villages, slums, or urban areas can be under 
social internship. The internship will be more fruitful if students work in teams. The 
teams can select one or more fields to do their best in the field of agriculture, 
watershed management, wastelands development, non -conventional energy, low -
cost housing, sanitation, nutrition and personal h ygiene, schemes for skill 
development, income generation, blood bank, and government schemes such as 
i) (Swachch Bharat: Swachh Bharat Mission, Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, or Clean 
India Mission is a country -wide campaign to eliminate open defecation and 
improve solid waste management. 
ii) Accessible India: Accessible India Campaign or Sugamya Bharat Abhiyan is a 
program to serve the differently able community of the country. 
iii)  Digital India: A campaign to ensure the Government's services are made 
available to citizens electronically by improved online infrastructure and by 
increasing Internet connectivity or making the country digitally empowered in the 
field of technology. 
iv) Beti Bachao and Beti Padhao: A campaign of the Government of India that aims 
to generate awareness and improve the efficiency of welfare services intended for 
girls in India. 
v) Environment and Energy Conservation and Education, legal aid, consumer 
protection, and allied field including Indian Red Cross Society, National Cadet 
Corps, Bharat Scouts, and Guides. 
Societal activities are one of the NBA graduates attributes that are part of PO6 and 
PO7, which are reproduced below. 
vi) PO6: The Engineer and The World: Analyze and evaluate societal and environmental 
aspects while solving complex engineering problems for its impact on sustainability with 
reference to economy, health, safety, legal framework, culture and environment. 
vii) PO7: Ethics: Apply ethical principles and commit to professional ethics, human 

=== PAGE 56 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 44   
values, diversity and inclusion; adhere to national & international laws.  
Given the above, internship coordinators should encourage students to take up a 
societal internship as far as possible.  
 
3.3.2 List of proposed activities  
a. Activities concerned with the works of Indian scholars like Charaka and Susruta, 
Aryabhata, Bhaskaracharya, Chanakya, Madhava, Patanjali, Panini, and 
Thiruvalluvar, among numerous others 
b. Community Photography. 
c. Short film production: Contemporary aspects, technical aspects, etc. 
d. Internship in Disaster Management. 
e. Solar energy connected activities that help the common man. 
f. Working with Smart City Administration. 
g. Hackathon (it is a design sprint-like event in which computer programs and others 
involved in software development, including graphic designers, interface 
designers, project managers, and others, often including domain experts 
collaborate intensively on software projects). 
h. Industrial Safety, Fire Safety, Electrical Safety, Chemical Process Safety, Food 
Safety, etc. 
i. Internship and project work in Indian Knowledge System Related Areas/Topics. 
 
3.3.3 Documents to be submitted by Students for Community Engagement 
Evaluation 
3.3.3.1 Student’s Diary 
The main purpose of writing a daily diary is to cultivate the habit of 
documenting and to encourage the students to search for details. It develops 
the student's thought process and reasoning abilities. The students shall record 
in the daily training diary the day -to-day account of the observations, 
impressions, information gathered, suggestions given, if any, and activities 
carried out. It should contain sketches and drawings related to the 
observations made by the students. The daily training diary should be signed 
after every day or at least twice a week by the faculty/ in charge of the section 
(external expert) where the student has been working. 
Student’s Diary should be submitted by the students along with attendance 
records. It shall be evaluated based on the following criteria: 
i) Regularity in the maintenance of the diary. 
ii) Adequacy and quality of information recorded. 
iii) Drawings, sketches, and data were recorded. 
iv) Thought processes and recording techniques were used. 
v) Organization of the information 
 
3.3.3.2 Report: Community Engagement (CEN) 
After completion of the CEN, the student shall prepare, with a daily diary as 
a reference, a compr ehensive report in consultation with the mentor/s to 
indicate what he/she has observed and learned in the training period along 
with the internship outcomes. The CEN report should be signed by the 

=== PAGE 57 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 45   
mentor. The Internship report shall be evaluated based on t he following 
criteria and/or other relevant criteria about the activity completed.  
i) Originality.  
ii) Adequacy and purposeful write-up.  
iii) Organization, format, drawings, sketches, style, language, etc.  
iv)  Practical applications, relationships with basic theory, and concepts 
taught in the appropriate course. 
v) Variety and relevance of learning experience. 
 
3.3.3.3 Procedure for the Evaluation of Community Engagement 
a) Students should submit the reports immediately on completion of the 
Internship to the respective mentors as outlined in Table B-2 
b) The Examination of the Community Engagement will be carried out by the 
mentor 
c) The Community Engagement shall be slated for 100 marks CIE only and 
will not have SEE. 
d) Community Engagement marks are based on CIE marks (25 marks for the 
Social Connect and responsibility, 25 marks for the presentation, and 50 
marks for the report and final presentation).  
e) A Viva -Voce exa mination to be conducted (Presentation followed by 
question-answer session) and the prescribed credit shall be included in the 
VIII semester grade card. 
 
3.3.4 Assessment Rubrics for evaluation of Community engagement (Intra and Inter -
Institutional Activities) 
Table – B2.  Community Engagement Assessment Rubrics 
Scheduled during the first year (Prescribed Period 02 weeks and Prescribed credits: 
02) 
 
 
Sl 
No 
 
 
Sub Activity  
Head 
 
 
Performance/ 
Appraisal 
Assessment 
Rubrics 
(Allotted 
Percentage 
marks 
decide the 
letter 
grade) 
Percentage 
Marks 
 
Proposed 
Document as 
Evidence 
 
 
Evaluated 
by 
1 Community 
Engagement: 
Inter/ Intra 
Excellent 80 to 100  
(i) Student’s 
Diary and 
Institute 
Faculty 
(mentor) 
Good 60 to 79 
Satisfactory 50 to 59 

=== PAGE 58 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 46   
Institutional 
activitiues. 
Unsatisfactory and fail < 50 (ii) Communi
ty 
Engagement 
Report along 
with the 
certificate 
issued from 
the relevant 
authorized 
Authority 
together with 
External 
Expert, if any. 
 
Note: The total CIE marks are 100 (25 marks for the Social Connect and responsibility, 25 marks 
for the presentation, and 50 marks for the report and final presentation) shall be the sum of marks 
allotted to completed activities by the student. 
 
  
3.4 Industry Internship (04 weeks) [Scheduled during the intervening period of IV & V semesters 
and VI & VII semesters]  
3.4.1 Industrial Internships 
The gap between the theoretical knowledge obtained in the classrooms and the 
practical skills required in the actual workplace scenarios is fast gr owing. This has 
put forth varied challenges to graduating students when it comes to job placements. 
As institutes cannot have a relevant facility to expose students to a real-time industrial 
environment, an industrial internship is an appropriate solution. 
The main objective of the industry internship is to ensure that the intern is exposed 
to a real job world environment and gains practical experience. Often, it may be a 
practical exposure to the theory that has been learned during the academic period. 
The industry internship helps students understand analytical concepts and tools, hone 
their skills in real-life situations, and build confidence in applying the skills learned. 
3.4.1.1 Industry Internship Benefits 
i) Have ample opportunities to attend seminars, symposiums, workshops, etc. 
This in turn provides an opportunity to establish rapports with professionals and 
pioneers in their respective fields for further growth. 
ii)  Have wide scope to publish paper/s in journals. 
iii) Good recommendation letter/s that increas e the prospectus for further 
internships, higher studies, and placements. 
iv) Helps to acquire team spirit, motivated acts, techniques to resolve conflicts, etc. 
v) Helps to develop a lot of leadership skills. 
vi) Increases the prospect of placement in the same conce rn, provided the intern 
has exhibited a clear understanding of basics and completed the internship. 
vii) Fosters to substantiate the issues with facts and figures. 
For AICTE Internship opportunities refer to https://internship.aicte-india.org/ 
3.4.2 Industry Internship Supervision 
During the intervening period of the IV & V semesters and VI & VII semesters, 
students shall be ready for industrial experience. Therefore, they shall choose to 
undergo an Internship inv olving Innovation / Entrepreneurship/short -term (about 4 

=== PAGE 59 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 47   
weeks) societal -related activities. Students may choose to work on innovation or 
entrepreneurial activities, or both resulting in start -up or undergo internship with 
industry/NGO/ Government organizations/ Micro/ Small/ Medium enterprises to make 
themselves ready for the industry.  
● The internship shall be carried out under the supervision of a faculty mentor. The 
faculty mentor/guide should, 
● Serve as a teacher, mentor, trainer, critic, leader, and boss. 
● Provide sufficient time to guide the interns. (Interns are students or a trainee who 
does a job to gain work experience) 
● Play a vital role, along with the Training and Placement Officer, in providing 
internship opportunities for the students. 
● Exhibit qualities such as leadership, strong communication skills, and patience. 
● Provide a letter of recommendation in due consultation with students and the 
industrial organization (if possible) where the internship is intended to be carried 
out, endorsed by the authority (Principal/Institution Internship Coordinator). 
● Each faculty mentor shall supervise the students/Student batches allotted to them. 
Often, the supervision may be by an external expert also. In such cases, the faculty 
mentor shall jointly guide the student/s without causing 
miscommunications/embarrassment to either side.  
● Depending on the activity taken up by the students, the internship shall be carried 
out individually or in batches having not more than three students. 
● Faculty Mentor, along with the external expert, shall scrupulously evaluate the 
work of an individual student or students of a batch and maintain the relevant 
documents.  
● For allotment of CIE marks, the institutions shall prepare the rubrics for each 
activity offered by the institution as given in Table - B2. The marks shall be 
allotted by the Internship committee designated by HOD in consultation with the 
mentors. 
● For all activities conducted by the institution, the attendance of the students shall 
be maintained by the faculty and maintained in their respective departments. 
3.4.3 Innovation 
Innovation refers to a new or improved product or process or a combination thereof 
that differs marginally or significantly from the unit’s previous product. An innovation 
center is a place where students are encouraged to implement the innovative ideas 
formed through imagination, brainstorming sessions, design thinking, and associated 
activities to bring them to reality. It is a place, where creative minds are shaped. 
  

=== PAGE 60 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 48   
3.4.4 Entrepreneurship 
Entrepreneurship refers to setting up a new business or business and taking on financial 
risks in the hope of profit. It involves investment to undertake production along with 
arranging inputs like land, labour, material, and capital, introducing new techniques 
and products, identifying new sources for the enterprise, etc. 
 
3.4.5 Incubation Center 
An organized unit designed for innovation as well as to accelerate the growth and 
success of new entrepreneurial companies through mentorship and an array of business 
support resources and services that could include physical space, capit al, coaching, 
common services, and networking connections. 
 
3.4.6 Startup 
An entity that develops a business model based on either product innovation or service 
innovation and makes it scalable, replicable, and self-reliant. 
An entity shall be considered a Startup 
i) Up to ten years from the date of incorporation/ registration, if it is incorporated as 
a private limited company (as defined in the Companies Act, 2013) or registered as 
a partnership firm (registered under section 59 of the Partnershi p Act, 1932) or a 
limited liability partnership (under the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008) in 
India. 
ii) Turnover of the entity for any of the financial years since incorporation/ registration 
has not exceeded one hundred crore rupees. 
iii) The entity is w orking towards innovation, development, or improvement of 
products or processes, or services, or if it is a scalable business model with a high 
potential for employment generation or wealth creation. 
iv) Provided that an entity formed by splitting up or recons truction of an existing 
business shall not be considered a Startup. 
 
3.4.7 Places for Innovation/Entrepreneurial Activities 
Students shall carry out Innovation or Entrepreneurial activities or both at the 
Incubation Center and Entrepreneurship Cell of the parent  institution or elsewhere 
such as ATAL Incubation Centers [A flagship of Atal Innovation Mission (AIM), 
NITI Aayog for promoting the culture of innovation and entrepreneurship in India], 
institutes of national importance, public sector units, IT companies,  government 
organizations, and non-governmental organizations, industries including MSME, etc.  
● Institutes should deter students to opt for internships at places established 
for commercial benefits.  
3.4.8 Assessment Rubrics for Innovation / entrepreneurship/ Industry Internship 
Activities (refer Table B3) 
Once the internship begins, the students are required to maintain a diary/journal and 
submit a report regularly to the guide. These reports should summarize the activities 
in which the student was involved during the previous week's period. At the end of 
the internship, each student is required to submit a hard copy of the consolidated 
diary/journal and report for evaluation. The report should indicate the learning and 

=== PAGE 61 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 49   
achievements of the internship. 
  
 
 
4. Capstone Project/Professional Practice / Research Internships 
4.1 Capstone project/Research Internship/Professional practice  of sufficient duration 
encourages students early on in their careers. Its main goal is to allow improving their 
analytical and technical skills in an international environment. An internship can be in an 
industry or at an appropriate workplace. 
● Research internships/industrial projects have different purposes and come with a set of 
benefits. A prior experience in any field is always preferred over a fresh start. Therefore, 
one of them can be selected depending on the interest the students have. Internships pose 
unexpected challenges and make students think appropriately, tackle difficulties with 
ease, and act in a scholarly way to get past the hurdles and practical constraints. An 
internship is always beneficial however good or bad it is. 
● Professional practice not only enhance one’s learning but also identifies him/her as 
someone who commits to approaching a project and completing it with or without 
guidance. Internship learning is an impetus for professional development. 
● While a research internship is a stepping stone to higher studies, an industry internship is 
a pathway to a placement. Those who are self -motivated and interested in searching for 
new things that are original and unique can choose a research in ternship. Those who are 
interested in real industry - experience and aspire to get a job soon after graduation can 
choose an industry internship. 
● Research Internships (Also known as dissertation internships) are focused research 
projects that push students’  intellectual abilities beyond those driven by the classroom. 
Often, a research internship typically helps solve problems that are usually part of major 
Table – B3.  Innovation/entrepreneurship/ Industry Internship Activities and Assessment 
Rubrics 
Scheduled during the intervening period of IV & V semester and VI & VII Sem 
(Prescribed Period 04 weeks: Credits 04) 
Sub Activity 
Head 
Performance/ 
Appraisal 
Assessmen
t Rubrics 
Proposed 
Document as Evidence 
Evaluate
d by 
(1) Development of 
new product/ 
Business Plan/ 
registration of start-
up 
Excellent 80 to 100 
(i) Student’s Diary and (ii) 
Internship Report or the 
activity report along with 
Certificate or Declaration 
from relevant Authorized 
Authority. Wherever only 
Certificate is issued, 
Assessment shall be at the 
institute as per 
(i) and (ii) to decide the 
letter grade. 
(i)Institute 
Faculty 
(mentor) 
together with 
External 
Expert if any. 
 
Good 60 to 79 
Satisfactory 50 to 59 
Unsatisfactory 
and fail < 50 
(2) Internship with 
Industry/ Govt. / 
NGO/ PSU/ Any 
Micro/ 
Small/Medium 
Enterprise. 
Excellent 80 to 100 
Good 60 to 79 
Satisfactory 50 to 59 
Unsatisfactory 
and fail < 50  
Note: 
(i) The total CIE marks shall be the sum of marks allotted to successfully completed activities by 
the student. 

=== PAGE 62 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 50   
research projects. It involves a short theoretical or experimental research project 
supervised by a researcher. 
● The research internships, under the advice of a faculty supervisor, can be one’s own 
selected project or a project on which a Researcher is researching, or a new project/real -
world project offered by an organization. The research area may be about  single or 
multidisciplinary fields such as science, technology, engineering, mathematics, 
management, and business studies. Research internships can be carried out either 
individually or in teams (not exceeding 3 or 4 students). 
● Research internship opportunities, before graduation, maybe in a laboratory of college, a 
research institute, or a company’s R & D department. Apart from fixed working hours of 
the day of an organization, the researcher can devote sufficient time to other research -
related activities for early and successful completion of the Research Internship. 
 
4.2 Necessary Skills for Research Internship and Industrial Internship 
For the internships to progress without hurdles and for successful completion, the Researchers 
should maintain a harmonious relationship with the guide/s, administrators, co -workers, and 
others, and strictly adhere to the rules and regulations of the workplace.  
The other skills required or acquirable during the Internship are, 
● Good Communication skills. 
● Attention to detail. 
● Planning and scheduling. 
● Documentation. 
● Critical thinking. 
● Data collection. 
● Data analysis. 
● Ability to maintain quality, safety, and/or infection control standards. 
● Appreciating and practicing ethical issues. 
 
4.3 Responsibilities of an Intern 
Interns, 
a) If working with a researcher, shall assist the researcher in an ongoing research project or 
work collaboratively in designing a new project of mutual interest. 
b) Shall engage in literature survey and get an insight of the research work at the initial 
stages. 
c) Shall compile data, sort, file, implement ideas with minimal guidance and assist write 
papers. 
d) Shall become familiar with several tools [meters (Electrical and Electronics, mechanical, 
computer, etc.)] used in data collection, software, graphic software, Statistical Package 
for the Social Sciences (SPSS) software [IBM’s statistical software platform], etc. 
e) Shall attain skills with Microsoft Word Office, Excel, PowerPoint, Outlook, etc. 
f) Shall give a mid-term oral presentation to a committee for review and feedback. 
g) Shall attend discussions, meetings, symposiums, classroom lectures, etc., to learn new 
scientific techniques, design experi ments, analyze results, and formulate different 
hypotheses. 
h) Shall learn to write reports and be able to correspond independently. 
i) Shall manage time effectively. 

=== PAGE 63 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 51   
j) Shall keep a track of the progress of the project. 
k) Shall develop integrative thinking. 
 
4.4 Research internship Outcomes 
a) Generating technical paper/s and publishing in refereed journal/s. 
b) Possibility of acquiring intellectual ownership and patent. 
c) Build a prototype for an idea on which the research was carried out. 
d)  File patent/s. 
e) Add academic knowledge to the field. 
f)  Enhanced ability in arranging meetings, presentations, seminars, training, etc. 
g) Improved conscientiousness and ethics. 
 
4.5 Research internships Benefits 
a) Are a great way to pursue an academic career in teaching and research, as a Researc h 
Scientist at a Research Organization, Company, Industry sector, etc. 
b) Establish professional networks for a future career. 
c) Pave the way to join a research team and work alongside leading experts in the field. 
d)  Introduced to new ideas through interaction with like-minded students and others. 
e) Develop research skills and knowledge in a specific area of interest. 
f)  Provide opportunities for growth, achievement, and personal development. 
g) Offer an opportunity to publish a research paper that will boost the resume while applying 
for Post Graduate Studies 
 
5. Evaluation Procedure of Rresearch Internship /professional pract ice /and Capstone Project 
(16 weeks) 
5.1 The students pursuing the course Research Internship /professional practice /and 
Capstone Project shall submit the diary recordings of day -to-day activities to the 
concerned guide, reporting progress achieved in the cou rse and seeking guidance to 
proceed with the internship. The interns should provide all the details to the guide so 
that he/she can discuss with the employer to make the internship successful. 
5.2 The intern should constantly update the guide about the progress of the internship. The 
guide should know the intern’s internship tasks, duties, responsibilities, and potential 
projects. The evaluation of interns and their internship progress should be honest and 
constructive. 
5.3 The hardcopy or softcopy of the diary mai ntained by the interns must be signed at 
regular intervals by the guide. 
 
5.4 Regarding the intern’s feedback, the guides should propose changes in internship 
activities so that they are helpful to the internship. 
5.5 Illustrations, drawings, photos, forms, sample s, classified materials, etc., are to be 
included in the report only after obtaining the consent of the concerned authorities and 
should indicate the source of all such material. The final report should also be 
submitted to the place where the internship was carried out. The report should avoid a 
tone that is predominantly cynical or unduly critical of the employer or of those with 
whom the student intern has worked. The content of the report must be based on 
interns’ own work. 

=== PAGE 64 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 52   
5.6 Recommendation letter  
The guide must state whether the intern,  
a) Exceeded the expectations of the internship.  
b) Met the expectations of the internship.  
c) Did not meet the expectations of the internship.  
d) Did work to a satisfactory level.  
e) Did an unsatisfactory internship.  
In the end, the guide should issue a recommendation letter.  
5.7 Continuous Internal Evaluation (CIE) 
The guides should evaluate the interns using the following as well as any other 
appropriate methods. 
a) Punctuality of intern. 
b) Conduct and character. 
c) Tactfulness and politeness with colleagues and the public. 
d) Attitude regarding professionalism. 
e) Inquisitiveness and eagerness to learn. 
f)  Research attitude. 
g)  Problem-solving techniques. 
h) Innovation mindset. 
i) Time management and meeting deadlines. 
j) Receptiveness to feedback and critiques. 
k)  Ability to work in a team as a member. 
l) Ability to work without supervision. 
m) Supervisory skills and leadership skills. 
n)  Judgment and decision-making skills. 
o)  Writing skills, oral communication skills, technical communication skills, computer 
skills, analysis skills, and business writing skills. 
p)  Appropriateness of technical skills. 
q)  Familiarization with writing technical papers, standards, codes, etc. 
r)  Reading Behavioural attitude. 
s) Outcomes. 
t)  Successes and failures experienced 
  

=== PAGE 65 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 53   
5.8 Assessment of CIE marks 
5.8.1 Single discipline: The CIE marks shall be awarded by a committee consisting 
of the Head of the concerned Department and two faculty members of the 
Department, one of whom shall be the Guide. The CIE marks awarded for the 
internship, shall be based on the evaluation of the diary, presentation skill, and 
viva-voce in the ratio of 50:25:25.  
5.8.2 Interdisciplinary: The CIE marks awarded for the internship, shall be group-
wise at the institution level with the participation of all guides of the internship. 
Participation of external guide/s, if any, is desirable. 
5.8.3 The CIE marks awarded for the internship, shall be based on the evaluation of 
the diary, presentation skill, and viva-voce in the ratio of 50:25:25.  
 
5.9 Assessment of SEE marks 
5.9.1 Single discipline: Contribution to the internship and the performance of each 
group member shall be assessed individually in the semester -end examination 
(SEE) conducted at the department. Marks  shall be awarded based on the 
evaluation of the report, presentation skill, and viva -voce in the ratio of 
50:25:25.  
5.9.2 Interdisciplinary: Contribution to the internship and the performance of each 
group member shall be assessed individually in the semester -end examination 
(SEE) conducted separately at the departments to which the student/s belongs. 
Marks shall be awarded based on the evaluation of the report, presentation skill, 
and viva-voce in the ratio of 50:25:25. 
 
5.10 Evaluation Industry Internship/Professional Practice /Project Work: 
           Split-up of marks for evaluation of Project work for 100 CIE marks and 100 SEE marks. 
 
Split up Rubrics % 
Marks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report 
(50 % Marks) 
 
 
Content 
Development 
Abstract/ Synopsis Write-up 10 
Selection of Topic/ Relevance of the 
subject to the concerned discipline 05 
Problem Identification 05 
Objectives and Methodology 05 
 
 
Problem-
Oriented 
Exposition 
Literature Survey 
(Papers/Sites/Sources Surveyed) 10 
Documentation/ Systematic 
Approach 10 
Results (with inferences, Conclusions, 
etc.) 05 
Project 
Presentation 
Skill 
 Quality of preparation of 
presentation 05 
Communication Skills 05 

=== PAGE 66 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 54   
(25 % Marks) Technical knowledge and awareness 05 
Individual involvement 10 
 
Viva- Voce 
(25 % Marks) 
 The clarity in answering questions 
relating to fundamentals and concepts 10 
The clarity in answering the 
questions related to the project  
 
 
 
05 
The understanding ability of the 
questions asked 05 
The confidence in answering the questions 
asked.  
05 
  Total Marks 100 % 
 
  

=== PAGE 67 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 55   
B. Tech. Regulations and Syllabus 
 
Vision: 
To achieve excellence in engineering education by creating a dynamic learning environment, fostering 
collaboration and interdisciplinary research in Artificial Intelligence and Data science, while 
empowering our graduates to become leaders in the global AI landscape. 
 
Mission: 
● Creating an ecosystem of academic excellence by incorporating the best possible teaching-
learning methodology, collaborative research and the usage of modern IT infrastructure and 
tools. 
● Grooming professionals with high ethical values and inculcate the ability to solve real -life 
problems that involves data analytics. 
● Contribute towards the innovation of computing, AI system and Data Science to raise 
satisfaction level of all stakeholders. 
● To prepare professionals for employment in industry, research, higher education, 
community partnerships, and entrepreneurship to benefit the society. 
 
Program Educational Objectives (PEOs): 
Program educational objectives are the broad statements that describe the career and professional 
accomplishments that the program is preparing graduates to achieve. 
1. To have a successful professional career with capab ilities to build innovative solutions by 
applying the knowledge of Data Science and using technology as a tool to solve real -world 
problems. 
2. To develop an ethical attitude and shall exhibit effective skills in communication, management, 
teamwork, and leadership to lead and work as a team in a professional environment. 
3. To develop engineering, problem -solving, and critical thinking skills to create social, 
economical and sustainable impact and develop an ability to adapt themselves to the 
dynamically changing technologies for catering to the organizational needs. 
 
Program Outcomes (POs): 
Engineering Graduates will be able to: 
PO1: Engineering Knowledge : Apply knowledge of mathematics, natural science, 
computing, engineering fundamentals and an engineering specialization to develop to the 
solution of complex engineering problems.  
  
PO2: Problem Analysis: Identify, formulate, review research literature and analyze complex 
engineering problems reaching substantiated conclusions with consideration for sustainable 
development.  
 
PO3: Design/Development of Solutions: Design creative solutions for complex engineering 
problems and design/develop systems/compone nts/processes to meet identified needs with 
consideration for the public health and safety, whole-life cost, net zero carbon, culture, society 
and environment as required.  

=== PAGE 68 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 56   
PO4: Conduct Investigations of Complex Problems : Conduct investigations of complex 
engineering problems using research -based knowledge including design of experiments, 
modelling, analysis & interpretation of data to provide valid conclusions.  
 
PO5: Engineering Tool Usage : Create, select and apply appropriate techniques, resources 
and mo dern engineering & IT tools, including prediction and modelling recognizing their 
limitations to solve complex engineering problems.  
 
PO6: The Engineer and The World : Analyze and evaluate societal and environmental 
aspects while solving complex engineerin g problems for its impact on sustainability with 
reference to economy, health, safety, legal framework, culture and environment. 
 
PO7: Ethics : Apply ethical principles and commit to professional ethics, human values, 
diversity and inclusion; adhere to national & international laws.  
 
PO8: Individual and Collaborative Team work: Function effectively as an individual, and 
as a member or leader in diverse/multi-disciplinary teams.  
 
PO9: Communication : Communicate effectively and inclusively within the enginee ring 
community and society at large, such as being able to comprehend and write effective reports 
and design documentation, making effective presentations considering cultural, language, and 
learning differences. 
 
PO10: Project Management and Finance: Apply knowledge and understanding of 
engineering management principles and economic decision -making and apply these to one’s 
own work, as a member and leader in a team, and to manage projects and in multidisciplinary 
environments. 
   
PO11: Life-Long Learning: Recognize the need for and have the preparation and ability for      i) 
independent and life-long learning ii) adaptability to new and emerging technologies and        iii) critical 
thinking in the broadest context of technological change. (WK8) 
 
Program Specific Outcomes (PSOs): 
 
1. Apply the principles of artificial intelligence and data science to develop the systems that 
require data analysis, inference, perception, knowledge representation, and learning. 
2. Obtain the competencies to excel in Employment, Higher studies and Research in Artificial 
Intelligence and Data Science while upholding ethical values.  
3. Demonstrate proficient professional abilities for seamless collaboration within diverse and 
interdisciplinary teams, embracing a growth-oriented mindset. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 69 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 57   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Scheme & Syllabus for 
 First Year B.Tech.(AIDS, AIML, CCE, CSE, ISE, RAI, CYB, AND CSBS) 
 
2026-27 
 
  

=== PAGE 70 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 58   
 
ADVANCED CALCULUS  
 
Course Code:  26MAT103 Course Type: BSC 
Teaching Hours/Week (L-T-P):  3-1-0 Credits: 04 
Total Teaching Hours: 45+15+0 CIE + SEE Marks: 60+40 
 
Teaching Department: Mathematics 
COMMON FOR CSE/ISE/CCE/AIM/AI&DS/R&AI/CYB/CBS 
Course Objectives: 
● This course will enable the students to master the concepts, methods of solutions and basic tools used 
under single variable, multivariable differential calculus. 
● The course also imparts knowledge of modeling and solving Ordinary and partial differential equation. 
● The course also includes techniques of multiple integration with applications 
UNIT-I 
Differential calculus 9+3 Hours 
Polar curves, angle between tangent and radius vector, angle of intersection, pedal equation, radius of curvature (no 
derivations).  Taylor’s and Maclaurin’s series (without proof)-problems.  
UNIT-II 
Partial Differentiation 9+3 Hours 
Partial derivatives, Homogeneous function, Euler’s theorem, Total derivative, Partial differentiation of implicit and 
composite functions, Jacobian, Maxima and Minima for function of two variables. Lagrangian multipliers,  
UNIT-III 
Ordinary differential equation 9+3 Hours 
Linear differential equation, Bernoulli differential equation, exact differential equation, second and higher order 
differential equation with constant coefficients-complimentary function, particular Integral, variation of parameter.  
UNIT-IV 
Partial differential equations 9+3 Hours 
Formation of partial differential equations by eliminating arbitrary constants and arbitrary functions. Classification 
of 2nd order PDES. Solution of P.D.E: Direct integration method and method of separation of variables.  So lution 
of heat, wave and Laplace equations.  
UNIT-V 
Multiple Integrals 9+3 Hours 
Multiple integrals –Evaluation of double and triple integrals, change of variables, area using double and volume 
using triple integrals. Gamma and Beta functions, Relation between Beta and Gamma functions, properties and 
Problems 
 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course student will be able to 
 
1 Apply concepts of polar curves and expand functions into Taylor series. 
2 Apply concept of multivariate calculus and Extremize functions arising in engineering field. 
3 Model and solve Ordinary differential equations in engineering field 
4 Form and solve partial differential equations relevant to engineering. 
5 Apply concepts of multiple integration and special functions. 
 
  

=== PAGE 71 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 59   
Course Outcomes Mapping with Program Outcomes & PSO 
 
Program Outcomes→ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 PSO↓ 
↓ Course Outcomes    
26MAT103.1 3 2 - - - - - - - - - - - - 
26MAT103.2 2 2 - - - - - - - - - - - - 
26MAT103.3 3 2 - - - - - - - - - - - - 
26MAT103.4 3 2 - - - - - - - - - - - - 
26MAT103.5 3 2 - - - - - - - - - - - - 
1: Low 2: Medium 3: High 
 
TEXTBOOKS: 
1 B.S. Grewal, “Higher Engineering Mathematics”, Khanna Publications, 43rd Edition, 2015. 
2 Erwin Kreyszig, “Advanced Engineering Mathematics”, John Wiley and Sons, 10 th Edition 
(Reprint), 2016. 
3 N.P. Bali and M.Goyal, “A text book of Engineering Mathematics”, Laxmi Publications, 2010. 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1 G.B. Thomas and R.L.Finney, “Calculus and Analytic geometry”, Pearson, 2002. 
2 W.E. Boyce and R.C. DiPrima, “Elementary Differential Equations and Boundary Value Problems”, 
Wiley India, 2009 
3 G.F. Simmons and S.G. Krantz, “Differential Equations”, McGraw Hill, 2007 
4 Shepley L Ross, “Differential equations” 3rd edition, Wiley, 2004 
5 Shanthi Narayan, “ Differential Calculus, 6th edition, Shyam Lal Charitable Trust, Delhi. 
E Books / MOOCs/ NPTEL 
1 http://nptel.ac.in/courses/111106100/ 
2 https://nptel.ac.in/courses/122101003 
 
  

=== PAGE 72 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 60   
QUANTUM COMPUTING AND MODERN PHYSICS  
(For all IT Branches and RAI) 
 
Course Code:  26PHY102 Course Type: BSC 
Teaching Hours/Week (L:T:P: S):  3:0:2:0 Credits: 04 
Total Teaching Hours: 45+0+30 CIE + SEE Marks: 60+40 
 
Teaching Department: Physics 
Course Objectives: 
 
1. To understand the concepts of quantum mechanics. 
2. To study the principles of quantum computing and its applications. 
3. To study the properties of conductors and superconductors and their applications. 
4. To identify the fundamental principles of semiconductors to apply in electronic devices. 
5. To understand the principles, construction, and applications of LASERs and Optical fibres. 
 
 
UNIT-I 
Quantum Mechanics 09 Hours 
Introduction to quantum mechanics, de Broglie Hypothesis and Matter Waves, de Broglie 
wavelength, Phase Velocity and Group Velocity, Relation between Phase Velocity and Group 
Velocity (Derivation), Relation between Particle Velocity and Group Velocity, Heisenberg’s 
Uncertainty Principle - Application of Uncertainty Principle (nonexistence o f electron inside the 
nucleus), 
Wave Function, Physical Significance of a wave function, Time independent Schrödinger wave 
equation (Derivation), Eigen functions and Eigen Values, Particle inside one dimensional infinite 
potential well, Numerical Problems. 
UNIT-II 
Quantum Computing 09 Hours 
Introduction to Quantum Computing, Moore’s law and and its end, Differences between Classical 
& and Quantum computing. Dirac representation and matrix operations: Matrix representation of 0 
and 1 States, Identity Operator I, Applying I to |0 ⟩ and |1⟩ states, Row and Column Matrices and 
their multiplication (Inner Product), Orthogonality, Orthonormality. Concept of qubit and its 
properties. Representation of qubit by Bloch sphere. Single and Two qubits. Extension to N qubits. 
Numerical Problems. 
Quantum Gates: Single Qubit Gates: Quantum Not Gate, Pauli – X, Y and Z Gates, Hadamard Gate, 
Phase Gate (or S Gate). 
UNIT-III 
Conductors and Superconductors 09 Hours 
Free-electron concept. Classical free-electron theory – Assumptions, Drift velocity, mean collision 
time, mean free path and relaxation time, Expression for electrical conductivity in metals (Drude -
Lorentz theory), Failures of classical free -electron theory. Quantum free - electron theory  – 
Assumptions, Fermi energy and Fermi factor for metals and its variation with temperature, Numerical 
problems. 
Introduction to superconductors, characteristic properties: Meissner effect, Critical field, Critical 
Current. Type -I and Type -II superconducto rs. BCS theory (qualitative). High temperature 

=== PAGE 73 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 61   
superconductors, Numerical problems. 
UNIT-IV 
Semiconductors 09 Hours 
Introduction to semiconductors, intrinsic and extrinsic semiconductors - carrier generation, Direct and 
indirect band gap semiconductors. Expression for concentration of electrons in conduction band and 
and holes concentration in valance band (only mention the expression), Fermi level in Intrinsic and 
Extrinsic Semiconductors and its behavior with temperature, Electrical cond uctivity of an intrinsic 
semiconductor (derivation) and effect of temperature on intrinsic conductivity, Hall effect, Expression 
for Hall coefficient (derivation) and its application. 
p-n junction: Junction formation, Unbiased and biased p -n junction, Devices: LED, Photodiode and 
solar cell. Numerical problems. 
UNIT-V 
LASER and Optical Fibers 09 Hours 
Introduction to lasers, Characteristics of LASER, Interaction of radiation with matter, Einstein’s 
coefficients (Qualitative), Requisites of a Laser System. Conditions for Laser action. Principle, 
Construction and Working of Nd:YAG LASER and semiconductor LASER, Application of Lasers in 
Bar code scanner and Laser Printer. Numerical Problems. 
Introduction and Principle of Optical Fibers (TIR), Propagati on mechanism in optical fibers - Angle 
of Acceptance and Numerical Aperture N.A.), Expression for NA, Fractional Index Change, Modes 
of Propagation, Number of Modes and V Number, Types of Optical Fibers, Attenuation, Factors 
contributing and Mention of Expression for Attenuation coefficient, Numerical problems. 
 
List of Experiments  
1.  Energy gap of a semiconductor (any method). 
2.  Hall effect  
3.  I-V characteristics of Zener diode 
4.  Solar cell characteristics. 
5.  Determination of wavelength by Laser diffraction. 
6.  Diffraction of White light by optical grating 
7.  Determination of acceptance angle and numerical aperture of the given Optical Fiber. 
8.  Photo electric effect – Determination of the work function of the material of the emitter of a 
photocell. 
9.  Photo-Diode characteristics 
10.  LED characteristics and determination of Planck’s Constant using LEDs. 
11.  Transistor Characteristics. 
12.  Determination of Fermi Energy of Copper. 
13.  Resonance in LCR circuits. 
14.  Simulation experiment. 
 
  

=== PAGE 74 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 62   
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course students will be able to 
 
1. Apply the knowledge of quantum mechanics to analyse the physical properties exhibited by 
particles at sub-atomic level. 
2. Apply the basic principles of Quantum Mechanics in Quantum Computing. 
3. Apply knowledge of conductor and superconductor properties to engineering applications. 
4. Analyze the role of semiconductors in electronic devices, exploring the properties of 
semiconductors. 
5. Analyze the properties of optical waves in the phenomena of lasing action and signal 
propagation. 
 
 
Course Outcomes Mapping with Program Outcomes & PSO 
 
Program Outcomes→ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 PSO↓ 
↓ Course Outcomes    
26PHY102-1.1 3 2      2   1    
26PHY102-1.2 3 2      2   1    
26PHY102-1.3 3 2      2   1    
26PHY102-1.4 3 2      2   1    
26PHY102-1.5 3 2      2   1    
1: Low 2: Medium 3: High 
 
TEXTBOOKS: 
1. Parag K Lala, “Quantum Computing – A Beginner’s Introduction”, Indian Edition, McGraw 
Hill, Reprint 2020. 
2. B. G. Streetmann, “Solid State Electronic devices”, 6 th edition, Prentice Hall India Learning 
Private Limited. 
3. A. Ghatak, “Optics”, Tata McGraw Hill Pub., 5th Edition, 2012. 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1. Michael A. Nielsen & Isaac L. Chuang, “Quantum Computation and Quantum Information”, 
Cambridge Universities Press, 2010 Edition. 
2. Vishal Sahani, “Quantum Computing”, McGraw Hill Education, 2007 Edition. 
3. Maria Luisa Dalla Chiara, Roberto Giuntini, Roberto Leporini, Giuseppe Sergioli, “Quantum 
Computation and Logic: How Quantum Computers Have Inspired Logical Investigations”, 
Trendsin Logic, Volume 48, Springer. 
4. Gupta and Kumar, “Solid State Physics”, K. Nath & Co., Meerut. 
5. A. J. Dekker, “Electrical Engineering Materials”, Prentice Hall India Pub., New Delhi, Reprint 
2011. 
6. S. O. Pillai, “Solid State Physics”, New Age International Private Limited, 8th Edition, 2018. 
7. M. Ali. Omar, “Elements of Solid State Physics: Principles and Applications”, Pearson 
Publishers. 
8. Arthur Beiser, “Concepts of Modern Physics”, Tata McGraw Hill Education Private Limited, 
Special Indian Edition, 2009. 
9. Kenneth Krane, “Modern Physics”, Wiley International, 3rd Edition, 2012. 
10. Michael Tinkham, “Introduction to Superconductivity”, II Edition, McGraw Hill, INC 
 
E Books / MOOCs/ NPTEL/ Web links 
1. LASER: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WgzynezPiyc 
2. Superconductivity: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MT5Xl5ppn48 

=== PAGE 75 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 63   
3. Optical Fiber: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N_kA8EpCUQo 
4. Quantum Mechanics: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p7bzE1E5PMY&t=136s 
5. Quantum Computing: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jHoEjvuPoB8 
6. Quantum Computing: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZuvCUU2jD30 
7. Physics of Animation: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kj1kaA_8Fu4 
8. Statistical Physics Simulation: https://phet.colorado.edu/sims/html/plinko-
probability/latest/plinkoprobability_en.html 
9. NPTEL Superconductivity: https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/115/103/115103108/ 
10. NPTEL Quantum Computing: https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/115/101/115101092 
11. Virtual LAB: https://www.vlab.co.in/participating-institute-amrita-vishwa-vidyapeetham 
12. Virtual LAB: https://vlab.amrita.edu/index.php?sub=1&brch=189&sim=343&cnt=1 
 
 
Activity Based Learning (Suggested Activities in Class)/ Practical Based learning 
1. http://nptel.ac.in 
2. https://swayam.gov.in 
3. https://virtuallabs.merlot.org/vl_physics.html 
4. https://phet.colorado.edu 
5. https://www.myphysicslab.com 
 
 
  

=== PAGE 76 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 64   
PROBLEM SOLVING THROUGH PROGRAMMING 
 
Course Code:  26CSE103 Course Type: ESC 
Teaching Hours/Week (L:T:P:J:SL)  3:0:2:0:2 Credits: 04 
Total Teaching Hours: 45:0:30:0:30 CIE + SEE Marks: 60+40 
 
Teaching Department: Any 
Course Objectives: 
1 Make students learn the basics of C programming language including the basic data types, Operators 
and Evaluating expressions in C. 
2 Apply the concepts of decision making and looping in problem solving to demonstrate its usage 
using simple programs. 
3 Design and implement efficient C programs using arrays and strings to manage and manipulate data 
effectively. 
4 Demonstrate the usage of Pointers and User-defined functions, code reusability in problem solving 
along with parameter passing and returning with the help of user defined functions. 
5 Demonstrate the usage of structures and File handling that are essential for understanding the 
concepts with simple examples. 
 
UNIT-I 
Introduction To Computer and C language, Operators and Expressions: 09 Hours 
Introduction to computers: Introduction to Computer System and problem solving, Program Development 
steps, Introduction to Programming Languages, input and output devices, Algorithm, Flowchart, Designing 
efficient programs. Evolution & Characteristics of C Language, Structure of a C Program, C Compilation 
Model. Chara cters set, C tokens, Keywords and identifiers, Constants, Variables, Data Types, and 
Declaration of Variables. Formatted and Unformatted Input/Output:Formatted I/O: printf() ,scanf() 
,Unformatted I/O:getchar(),putchar() ,gets() and puts(), Command line arguments. 
Operators and Expressions:  Arithmetic operators, Relational operators, Logical operators, Assignment 
operators, Increment, Decrement operators, Conditional(Ternary) operator, Bitwise operators, Special 
Operators. Arithmetic expressions, Evaluation of expressions, Precedence of operators, Type conversions in 
expressions, Operator precedence and associativity. 
UNIT-II 
Decision control and Looping statements: 09 Hours 
Decision making and Branching:  Decision making with if statement, Simple if Statement, the if...else 
statement, Nesting of if...else statements, The else...if ladder, The switch statement. 
Decision making and Looping: The for statement,  the while statement, the do...while statement, Jump 
statements (goto, break, continue). 
UNIT-III 
Arrays and Strings:  09 Hours 
Arrays: Declaration of arrays, accessing the elements of an array, storing values in arrays, Operations on 
arrays, Passing arrays to functions, Multidimensional arrays-Two dimensional arrays, operations on two -
dimensional arrays, two-dimensional arrays to functions, Example Programs on arrays:linear search, binary 
search, selection sort, bubble sort. 
Strings: Declaring and Initializing strings, String manipulation functions, String input and output functions. 
UNIT-IV 
Pointers, Functions: 09 Hours 
Introduction to pointers: declaration and initialization of pointers, accessing the address of the variable, 
accessing the variable through the pointer. 
Functions: Introduction using functions, Function definition, function declaration, function call, return 
statement, passing par ameters to functions -call by value, call by reference, storage classes, scope of 
variables, recursive functions, Example Programs on Functions. 
  

=== PAGE 77 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 65   
UNIT-V 
Structures, Files: 09 Hours 
Structures: Defining Structure, Declaration of Structure Variable, Accessing Structure members, copying 
and comparing structure variable, operation on individual member, nesting of structures, Array of structures. 
Application of pointers and function on Structures. 
Files: Basic file operations: Open, Close, Read, Write. 
List of Experiments  
Part-A 
1.  Write a C program to find the roots of a quadratic equation ax2+bx+c=0. 
2. Write a C program to find the sum of all the digits and occurrence of a digit in the number. 
3. Write a C program to find the GCD and LCM of given two numbers using Euclid’s method. 
4. Write a C program to print the prime numbers in a given range. 
5. Write a C program to perform a binary search for a given key integer in a single dimensional array 
of numbers in ascending order and report success or failure in the form of a suitable message.  
6. The books in the library are randomly placed on the shelves. Design a C program that sorts the 
books based on ISBN ,Use bubble sort to implement the program. 
7. Write a C program to find if a given string is a palindrome or not using string manipulation 
functions. 
8. An event registration system takes inputs from the command line:Participant Name, Age, and Event 
Name. Write a C program to display the details. 
Part-B 
1. Design, develop and execute a program in C to read two matrices A(M x N) and B(p x q) and compute 
the product of A and B. 
2. 
Write a C program using functions readmat( ), rowsum ( ), colsum ( ), totsum ( ) and printmat( ) to 
read the values into a two dimensional array A, find the sum of all the elements of a row, sum of all 
the elements of a column, find the total sum of all the elements of the two dimensional array A and 
print the results. 
3. 
Write a C program to input N integer numbers into a single -dimensional array, sort them into 
ascending order using selection sort technique, and then to print both the given array and the sorted 
array with suitable headings. 
4. Write a C program to read N integers into an array A and find the sum of elements using pointers. 
5. Write a C program to perform a linear search for a given key integer in a single-dimensional array of 
numbers and report success or failure in the form of a suitable message using functions. 
6. 
Write a C program to enter the information like name, register number, marks in 6 subjects of N 
students into an array of structures, and find the average & display grade based on average for each 
student. 
Average Grade 
80-100 Distinction 
60-79 First Class 
40-59 Second Class 
<40 Fail 
 
7. 
A college department wants to store and retrieve student names and marks for an internal audit. Write 
a C program that saves the data to a file named students.txt and then reads and displays the contents 
to verify the information. 
8. 
Design a C program that accepts two numerical values and an arithmetic operator (+, -, *, /) as 
command-line arguments. The program should compute and display the result of the specified 
operation. 
 
  

=== PAGE 78 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 66   
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course student will be able to: 
 
1 Describe the basics of computer systems, basics of C and the process of problem -solving aspects using 
algorithmic solutions for a given problem. 
2 Apply the knowledge to develop the C program using control statements such as branching and looping 
constructs for a given problem. 
3 Demonstrate the ability to implement and analyze operations on arrays and strings to solve computational 
problems. 
4 Apply the concept of pointers along with code reusability, parameter passing, and return values to develop 
efficient and maintainable C programs using functions. 
5 Implement and demonstrate the use of structures and file handling mechanisms in C programs. 
 
  
Course Outcomes Mapping with Program Outcomes & PSO 
 
Program Outcomes→ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 
↓ Course Outcomes 
26CSE103.1 2 1 - - - - - 1 - - - 
26CSE103.2 3 2 1 - - - - 1 - - - 
26CSE103.3 3 2 1 - - - - 1 - - - 
26CSE103.4 3 2 1 - - - - 1 - - - 
26CSE103.5 3 2 1 - - - – 1 - - - 
1: Low 2: Medium 3: High 
 
 
TEXTBOOKS: 
1 • E. Balaguruswamy, Programming in ANSI C, Tata McGraw Hill, 8th Edition, 2019. 
• E. Balaguruswamy, Programming in ANSI C, Tata McGraw Hill, 9th Edition, 2024(available in 
Amazon). 
2 Byron Gottfried, Programming with C, Schaums outlines series, 4th edition, 2018. 
3 Computer fundamentals and programming in C, Reema Thareja, Oxford University, 3rd edition, 
2023. 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1 Yashwant Kanetkar, Let Us C, 17th Edition, BPB Publications, New Delhi, 2018. 
2 Rajiv Khanna, Computer Concepts and C Programming, New Age International Pvt Ltd Publishers, 
2nd Edition, 2011. 
3 Kernighan & Ritchie, “The C Programming (ANSI C)”, Prentice Hall; 2nd Edition, 1998. 
E Books / MOOCs/ NPTEL 
1 http://www.lysator.liu.se/c/bwk-tutor.html#introduction 
2 C programming Tutorial by Mark Burgers http://markburgess.org/CTutorial/C-Tut-
4.02.pdf 
3 http://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105085/4 
 
  

=== PAGE 79 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 67   
BASIC ELECTRONICS 
 
Course Code:  26ECE111 Course Type: ESC 
Teaching Hours/Week (L: T:P: S):  3-0-0-0 Credits: 3 
Total Teaching Hours: 45 Hrs CIE + SEE Marks: 60+40 
 
Teaching Department:  Electronics and Communication Engineering 
Course Objectives: 
 
1 Familiarize the student with Semiconductor devices like Diodes with simple applications such as Rectifiers. 
2 Familiarize the student with Semiconductor devices like Transistors with simple applications such as 
switch and amplifier circuits. 
3 Analyze the working of simple electronic circuits involving Op-amps and Linear Regulator ICs. 
4 Understand the concepts of feedback and analyze Feedback amplifier and Oscillator circuits. 
5 Explore the fundamentals of Modern communication and Embedded Systems. 
 
UNIT-I 
Diodes and their Applications 09 Hours 
Semiconductor Diode, Diode Equivalent circuits, Half Wave Rectifier, Full wave Bridge Rectifier, capacitor filter 
circuit (only qualitative approach). Zener Diode and its use in Voltage Regulation. 
T1: Chapter 2-2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.9. T1: Chapter 3-3.1, 3.2, 3.7. 
UNIT-II 
Transistors and their Applications 09 Hours 
Bipolar Junction Transistor: (npn only) Construction and operation, Common Emitter Characteristics, CE- RC coupled 
amplifier (frequency response excluded), BJT as a switch. Field Effect Transistor: Construction, Drain and Transfer 
Characteristics of n-channel Enhancement mode MOSFET, CMOS Inverter. 
T1: Chapter 4-4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.6. T1: Chapter 5-5.10. T1: Chapter 6: 6.4. 
T2: Chapter 6-6.8, 6.11. 
UNIT-III 
Op-Amp & Linear IC Applications 09 Hours 
Introduction, Op-Amp Specifications, Differential & Common-Mode operation, Op-Amp applications: 
Inverting/Non- Inverting Amplifier, Inverting Summer, Integrator, Differentiator, Comparator.78XX series IC 
Voltage Regulators. 
T3: Chapter 2-2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.6. T2: Chapter 10: 10.4, 10.5. T3: Chapter 8: 8.2, 9.4.3. T2: Chapter 15- 15.5. 
UNIT-IV 
Feedback and Oscillator Circuits 09 Hours 
Feedback– Principle and advantages of negative feedback, Voltage series feedback amplifier, Concept of 
positive feedback, Op-Amp Oscillators – RC phase shift, Hartley and Colpitts’s Oscillator. 
T2: Chapter 14-14.1, 14.2, 14.5, 14.6, 14.8.  
UNIT-V 
Fundamentals of Communication and Embedded Systems 09 Hours 
Modern communication system scheme (Block scheme), Information source, Input Transducers, 
Transmitter, Channels, Receivers, Noise, Fundamentals of Cellular communication. Embedded system 
definition, Elements of Embedded systems, Core of Embedded systems, Microprocessor v/s 
Microcontroller, Sensors and Actuators with Examples. 
T4: Chapter 1-1.1, 1.2  T5: Chapter 1-1.4.3, 1.4.3.1, Chapter 2-2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4 T6: Chapter 1-1.1, 1.3, 
Chapter 2- 2.1, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3 
 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course student will be able to: 
 
1 Design diode-based circuits and voltage regulators 
2 Analyze the operation of transistors and CMOS inverters 
3 Apply operational amplifiers in analog signal processing 
4 Evaluate the effects of feedback and oscillator circuits 

=== PAGE 80 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 68   
5 Describe the components of modern communication and embedded systems 
 
  
Course Outcomes Mapping with Program Outcomes & PSO 
 
Program Outcomes→ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 PSO↓ 
↓ Course Outcomes 1 2  
26ECE111.1 3 2 1        1 2   
26ECE111.2 3 2 1     1    2   
26ECE111.3 3 2 1         2   
26ECE111.4 3 2 1  1      1 2   
26ECE111.5 3 2 1         2   
1: Low 2: Medium 3: High 
 
TEXTBOOKS: 
1 “Electronic Devices and Circuits” David A. Bell,PHI,5th, 2014 
2 “Electronic Devices and Circuit Theory"Robert L. Boylestad, Louis Nashelsky, Pearson,11th Edition, 2016.  
3 “Op-Amps and Linear Integrated Circuits”, Ramakanth A Gayakwad, Pearson, 4th Edition, 2016.  
4 “Introduction to Analog and Digital Communications “Simon Haykin, Wiley Publishers,2nd Edition, 
2019. 
5 Wireless Communications: Principles and Practice”, Theodore Rappaport, Pearson, 2nd Edition, 2016. 
6 “Introduction to Embedded Systems”, Shibu K V,TATA Mc Graw Hill Edu,2nd Edition, 2016. 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1 Electronic Devices”Thomas L Floyd,Pearson,9th , 2012 
2 D P Kothari, I J Nagrath,.Mc Graw Hill,2nd, 2018 
E Books / MOOCs/ NPTEL 
1 https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117107095 
2 https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117103063 
3 https://www.coursera.org/learn/electronics/syllabus 
4 https://www.coursera.org/learn/diode-pn-junction-metal-semiconductor-contact 
specialization=semiconductor-devices 
5 https://www.coursera.org/learn/transistor-field-effect-transistor-bipolarjunction-transistor 
specialization=semiconductor-devices 
 
  

=== PAGE 81 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 69   
ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE AND SUSTAINABILITY 
 
Course Code:  26CIV104 Course Type BSC 
Teaching Hours/Week (L: T: P: S)  2:0:0:0 Credits 02 
Total Teaching Hours 30 CIE + SEE Marks 60+40 
Prerequisite * 
 
Teaching Department: Civil Engineering 
Course Objectives: This Course will enable students to: 
 
1. To introduce the basic concepts of environment, ecosystems and biodiversity and 
emphasize on the biodiversity of India and its conservation 
2. To impart knowledge on the causes, effects and control or prevention measures of 
environmental pollution and natural disasters 
3. To facilitate the understanding of renewable and non-renewable resources, causes 
of their degradation and measures to preserve them. 
4. To familiarize the concept of sustainable development goals.  
5. To inculcate and embrace sustainability practices and develop a broader 
understanding on green materials, energy cycles.  
 
 
UNIT-I 
ENVIRONMENT AND BIODIVERSITY 05 Hours 
 Definition, scope and importance of environment – need for public awareness. Eco-
system and Energy flow– ecological succession. Types of biodiversity: genetic, species 
and ecosystem diversity– values of biodiversity, India as a mega-diversity nation – hot-
spots of biodiversity – threats to biodiversity: habitat loss, poa ching of wildlife, man -
wildlife conflicts – endangered and endemic species of India – conservation of 
biodiversity: In- situ and ex-situ. 
ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION 05 Hours 
Causes, Effects and Preventive measures of Water, Soil, Air and Noise Pollutions. Solid, 
Hazardous and E-Waste management. Case studies on Occupational Health and Safety 
Management system (OHASMS). Environmental protection, Environmental protection 
acts.  
 
RENEWABLE SOURCES OF ENERGY 05 Hours 
Energy management and conservation, New Energy Sources: Need of new sources. 
Different types new energy sources. Applications of - Bio energy, Hydrogen energy, 
Ocean energy resources, Tidal energy conversion. Concept, origin and power plants of 
geothermal energy. 
 
UNIT-II 

=== PAGE 82 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 70   
SUSTAINABILITY AND MANAGEMENT 07 Hours 
Sustainability- concept, needs and challenges -environmental, social and economic aspects 
of sustainability- Sustainable Development Goals-targets, indicators and intervention areas-
Protocols- Climate change - Global, Regional and local environmental issues and possible 
solutions-case studies. Concept of Carbon Credit, Carbon Footprint, water Foot print 
Environmental management in industry-A case study 
 
SUSTAINABILITY PRACTICES 08 Hours 
Zero waste and R concept, Circular economy, LCA standards-ISO 14000 Series, Material Life 
cycle assessment, Environmental Impact Assessment. Sustainable habitat: green buildings, 
green materials, Energy efficiency, Sustainable transports. Sustainable energy: Non -
conventional Sources, Energy Cycles - carbon cycle, emission and sequestration, Green 
Engineering: Sustainable urbanization- Socio- economic and technological change 
 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course student will be able to 
 
1. To recognize and understand the functions of environment, ecosystems and 
biodiversity and their conservation. 
2. To identify the causes, effects of environmental pollution and natural disasters and 
contribute to the preventive measures in the society. 
3. To identify and apply the understanding of renewable and non-renewable 
resources and contribute to the sustainable measures to preserve them for future 
generations. 
4. To recognize the different goals of sustainable development and apply them for 
suitable technological advancement and societal development. 
5. To demonstrate the knowledge of sustainability practices and identify green 
materials, energy Cycles and the role of sustainable urbanization 
 
  
Course Outcomes Mapping with Program Outcomes & PSO 
 
Program Outcomes→ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1
1 
PSO↓ 
↓ Course Outcomes 1 2 3 
26CIV104.1 1 2    2 3 2    1 3  
26CIV104.2 1 1 2   2 3 2    1 3  
26CIV104.3 2 1    2 3 2    1 3  
26CIV104.4 2 1    2 3 2    1 3  
26CIV104.5 1 1    2 3 2    1 3  
 1: Low 2: Medium 3: High 
 
  

=== PAGE 83 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 71   
TEXTBOOKS: 
1. Anubha Kaushik and C. P. Kaushik ‘s ―Perspectives in Environmental Studies‖, 6th 
Edition, New Age International Publishers ,2018. 
2. Benny Joseph, ‗Environmental Science and Engineering ‘, Tata McGraw-Hill, New 
Delhi, 2016. 
3.  Gilbert McMasters, ‗Introduction to Environmental Engineering and Science‘, 2nd 
edition, Pearson Education, 2004 
  
 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1. R.K. Trivedi, ‗Handbook of Environmental Laws, Rules, Guidelines, Compliances and 
Standards ‘, Vol. I and II, Enviro Media. 38 Edition 2010. 
2. Cunningham, W.P. Cooper, T.H. Gorhani, ‗Environmental Encyclopedia‘, Jaico Publ., 
House, Mumbai, 2001. 
3. Dharmendra S. Sengar, ‗Environmental law ‘, Prentice Hall of India PVT. LTD, New 
Delhi, 2007. 
4. Rajagopalan, R, ‗Environmental Studies-From Crisis to Cure ‘, Oxford University 
Press, Third Edition, 2015. 
5. Erach Bharucha ―Textbook of Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses‖ 
Orient Blackswan Pvt. Ltd. 2013 
6. R.K. Trivedi, ‗Handbook of Environmental Laws, Rules, Guidelines, Compliances and 
Standards ‘, Vol. I and II, Enviro Media. 38. Edition 2010. 
 
  

=== PAGE 84 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 72   
 
UNIVERSAL HUMAN VALUES & PROFESSIONAL ETHICS 
 
Course Code 26HSS102 Course Type HSMC 
Teaching Hours/Week (L:T:P:S) 02:0:0:0 Credits 02 
Total Teaching Hours 30+0+0 CIE + SEE Marks 60+40 
 
Teaching Department: Any 
Course Objectives: 
1 To enable the students to appreciate the ‘values’, “Skills’ and ‘Behaviour’ with an 
appropriate understanding of the ‘self’ to attain sustained happiness and prosperity with 
right aspirations of life 
2 To develop a holistic perspective among the students towards physical needs and prosperity 
of life 
3 To develop a holistic approach and understanding the importance of co-existence and living 
in harmony ensuring mutually fulfilling interaction with society and nature 
 
 
UNIT – I 
 10 Hours 
Self-exploration – Content and Process; Natural Acceptance and Empirical Validation 
Continuous Happiness and Prosperity – Understanding basic human aspirations; Mindfulness and 
awareness of right aspirations 
Right Understanding, Relationships and Physical Facilities – Requirements for the fulfillment of 
aspirations with correct priority – Happiness and Prosperity 
UNIT – II 
 10 Hours 
Understanding Harmony in the ‘Human being’ and Harmony in ‘Self’ – Human being as a co -
existence of sentient ‘I’ (Self) and ‘Body’; Body as an instrument 
 
UNIT – III 
 10 Hours 
Understanding Harmony in Family and Society – Harmony in Human Relationships; Universal 
harmonious order in Family, Society and Universe (Journey from Family to World Family); 
Personal and Professional Ethics; 
Understanding Harmony in Nature and Existence – Existence as ‘Co-existence’; Holistic Perception 
of Harmony at all levels of existence 
 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course, student will be able to 
 
1. have better self-exploration and understanding with a capacity to identify the priorities of 
life 
2. Generate sustainable solutions to problems with focus on human values and value-based 
living 
3. Understand and practice living in harmony, co-existence and natural acceptance at all 
levels  
4. Be ethically upright in their personal and professional practices 
 
  
Course Outcomes Mapping with Program Outcomes & PSO 
Program Outcomes→ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 PSO↓ 
↓ Course Outcomes 1 2 
26HSS102.1      3 2 2 1  2 - - 
26HSS102.2      3 2 2 1  2   

=== PAGE 85 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 73   
26HSS102.3      3 2 2 1  2   
26HSS102.4      3 2 1 1  2   
 
1: Low 2: Medium 3: High 
 
 
 
TEXT BOOK 
1 ‘A Foundation Course in Human Values and Professional Ethics’ by R.R. Gaur (Author), 
R.Sangal (Author), G.P. Bagaria (Author) 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS 
1 The power of Positive Thinking by Norman Vincent Peale 
2 The power of Now by Eckhart Tolle 
3 Mindfulness Yoga by Frank Jude Boccio 
 
Websites,  
Movies and Documents 
1 Value Education websites, http://uhv.ac.in, http://www.uptu.ac.in 
2 Story of Stuff, http://www.storyofstuff.com  
3 Al Gore, An Inconvenient Truth, Paramount Classics, USA  
4 Charlie Chaplin, Modern Times, United Artists, USA  
5 IIT Delhi, Modern Technology – the Untold Story  
6 Gandhi A., Right Here Right Now, Cyclewala Productions  
 
  

=== PAGE 86 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 74   
 
 ENGINEERING VISUALIZATION 
BIOLOGY FOR ENGINEERS 
 Course Code: 26BTY111 Course Type: BSC 
 Teaching Hours/Week (L: T: P: 
J): 1:0:0:0 Credits: 01 
 Total Teaching Hours 15+0+0 CIE + SEE Marks: 60+40 
Teaching Department: Biotechnology 
Course Objectives: 
 1. To learn the types of cells, biomolecules and life processes 
 2. To know the applications inspired by nature in various streams and real-life scenarios. 
UNIT-I 
INTRODUCTION FOR BIOLOGY FOR ENGINEERS 05 Hours 
Why Biology for Engineers? Living cell Types & Properties: Prokaryotes - Bacteria, Viruses and 
Fungi, Eukaryotes - Plant and Animal Cells, Biomolecules, Life Processes at Cellular Level. 
UNIT-II 
APPLICATIONS INSPIRED BY NATURE & REAL-LIFE SCENARIOS 10 Hours 
Composites in Construction, Termite Mound architecture, Countercurrent heat exchangers, Design 
of Aeroplan, helicopter and submarine, Information Theory and Biology, SONAR, Medical Devices. 
Recent scenarios in Environment, Agriculture and Medical Technology. 
 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course students will be able to 
 1. Ascertain the importance of Biology and understand the basics of cell and life 
processes 
 2. Draw the inspiration from nature in engineering design and visualize the application of 
biology in recent scenarios 
 
Course Outcomes Mapping with Program Outcomes & PSO 
Program Outcomes→ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 PSO↓ 
↓ Course Outcomes 1 2 
26BTY111.1 3 3 - - - - - 1 - - 1 - - 
26BTY111.2 3 3 - - - - - 1 - - 1   
1: Low 2: Medium 3: High 
TEXTBOOKS: 
1 Suraishkumar, G.K. Biology for Engineers, Oxford University Press India, 2019. 
2 Chakraborty, T, Akthar, N Biology for Engineers, PHI learning Print Book 
ISBN:9789391818142 eBook ISBN: 9789391818197 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1. Rao C.V., Biology for Engineers, 2021 
2. Raven, P. H. and Johnson, G. B. Biology. 4th Ed. WCB publishers, 2010. 
3. 
Ethier, R. S. and Simmons, C. A. Introductory biomechanics- From cells to organisms. 
Cambridge University Press, 2012 

=== PAGE 87 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 75   
 
Course Code:  26MEC122 Course Type PCC 
Teaching Hours/Week (L: T: P: S)  0:0:3:0 Credits 1 
Total Teaching Hours 30 CIE + SEE Marks 60+00 
 
Teaching Department: Mechanical Engineering 
Course Objectives: 
 
1. To impart and inculcate understanding of the concept of orthographic projection and 
projection of plane surfaces and solids in different position in first angle projection system. 
2. To draw the orthographic views of the simple machine parts and to draw the isometric 
projection of simple solids. 
 
UNIT-I 
Chapter 1: Orthographic Projection:  Introduction to orthographic projection, 
Quadrants, principal planes, principal views, Difference between First angle and third 
angle projection, Dimensioning, Conventions employed for drawing. Projection of 
points and projection of lines(First quadrant only) 
02 Hours 
 
Chapter 2: Projection of plane surface:  Triangle, Square, Rectangle, Pentagon, & 
Hexagon in simple position (Resting on HP with inclination to HP and VP, true length 
with true inclination only- No Beta angle) 
06 Hours 
 
UNIT-II 
Chapter 3: Projection of Solids: Prisms and Pyramids in simple position (Resting on 
HP with inclination to HP and VP, true length with true inclination only) 10 Hours 
UNIT-III 
Chapter 5: Isometric projection:  Isometric scale, Isometric dimensions, to dra w 
Isometric views of simple solids and machine components using their orthographic 
projections. 
06 Hours 
 
Chapter 6: Pictorial View into Orthographic Views: Orthographic projection (First 
angle projection) of simple machine components using their pictorial view.   06 Hours 
 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course student will be able to 
 
1.  Draw the orthographic projections of a plane for a given position using Solid Edge software. 
2.  Draw the orthographic projections of a solids and simple machine parts for a given position 
using Solid Edge software. 
3. Draw the orthographic views of the simple machine parts. Draw isometric projection of solid 
objects individually or in combination using Solid Edge software. 
 
  
  

=== PAGE 88 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 76   
Course Outcomes Mapping with Program Outcomes & PSO 
 
Program Outcomes→ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 PSO↓ 
↓ Course Outcomes 1 2 
26MEC122.1 3 1       1 1  2 1 
26MEC122.2 3 1       1 1  2 1 
26MEC122.3 3 1       1 1  2 1 
1: Low 2: Medium 3: High 
 
 
TEXTBOOKS: 
1. Engineering Drawing by N. D. Bhat & V. M. Panchal, Pramod R. Ingle, 53 Ed. 2014, 
Charotar Publishing House, Gujarat. 
2. Engineering Drawing by K R Gopalakrishna, Subhas publishers, Bangalore , 32nd edition, 
2012. 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1. A Primer on computer aided Engineering Drawing, Published by VTU, Belgaum, 8thedition, 2011. 
2. Engineering Drawing and Computer Graphics, Shah, Pearson, 2010 
3. Engineering Graphics, Agarwal & Agarwal, TMH, Second edition, 2013 
4. A Text book of Engineering Graphics And Drafting by P. S. GILL, 11th Ed.2009, S. K. Kataria 
& sons, ISBN- 8185749612, 9788185749617, New Delhi. 
 
  

=== PAGE 89 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 77   
LINEAR ALGEBRA  
 
Course Code:  26MAT106 Course Type: BSC 
Teaching Hours/Week (L-T-P):  3-1-0 Credits: 04 
Total Teaching Hours: 45+15+0 CIE + SEE Marks: 60+40 
 
Teaching Department: Mathematics  
Course Objectives: 
● The course will cover the concepts, methods to solve system of equations, evaluate Eigen values and 
Eigen vectors 
● The course will impart knowledge of Linear algebra such as vector space, linear transformation, inner 
product space and matrix decomposition 
● The course will also cover periodic function and Fourier analysis of periodic and aperiodic function. 
UNIT-I 
Matrices 9+3 Hours 
Elementary transformation of a matrix, Echelon form and rank of a matrix.  Consistency and solution of system 
of linear equations - Gauss elimination method. LU Decomposition method.  
Eigen values and Eigen vectors of a square matrix, Characteristic and minimal polynomial, Rayleigh's power 
method. 
UNIT-II 
Vector Spaces 9+3 Hours 
Vector spaces, subspaces, linear combination, spanning set, linearly dependent and independent vectors, basis 
and dimension, Change of basis, coordinates, row space, column space and null space. 
UNIT-III 
Linear Transformations 9+3 Hours 
Linear transformations, algebra of linear transformations, representation of transformations by matrices, 
isomorphism, Range(image) and Null space(Kernel) of a linear transformation. Rank – nullity theorem. Inner 
products, orthogonal sets of projections, Gram-Schmidt’s orthogonalization process. 
UNIT-IV 
Matrix Decompositions 9+3 Hours 
Diagonalization, Jordon Canonical form, Quadratic forms, QR-factorization, least -squares problems, and 
singular value decomposition. 
UNIT-V 
Fourier series and Integral Transforms 9+3 Hours 
Euler’s formulae, Dirichlet’s conditions for Fourier series expansion. 
Fourier Transforms:  Definition, Complex Fourier transforms, Cosine and Sine transforms, Inverse Fourier 
transforms. 
Laplace Transforms:  Definition, Laplace Transform of elementary functions, First shifting property, 
Transforms of periodic function, unit step function, unit impulse function, derivatives, integrals, multiplication 
by 𝑡𝑛, Division by 𝑡 (only statements of properties and its problems). Inverse Laplace transforms by the method 
of partial fractions. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course student will be able to 

=== PAGE 90 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 78   
 
1 Apply concept of Eigen values to engineering problems and solve system of equation numerically 
2 Construct vector spaces and analyse the properties like basis and dimensions 
3 Analyse problems adopting concepts of Linear transformation, Orthogonality and inner products 
4 Apply concepts of decomposition and canonical forms to engineering problems 
5 Apply Fourier analysis to periodic and aperiodic functions 
 
 
 
Program Outcomes→ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 PSO↓ 
↓ Course Outcomes    
26MAT106.1 3 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - 
26MAT106.2 2 3 - - - - - - - - - - - - 
26MAT106.3 2 2 - - - - - - - - - - - - 
26MAT106.4 3 2 - - - - - - - - - - - - 
26MAT106.5 2 2 - - - - - - - - - - - - 
1: Low 2: Medium 3: High 
TEXTBOOKS: 
1 Seymore Lipschutz, Marc Lipson, “Linear Algebra” 3 rd edition, Schaum series,Tata McGraw 
Hill,2011 
2 Erwin Kreyszig, “Advanced Engineering Mathematics”, John Wiley and Sons, 10 th 
Edition (Reprint), 2016 
3 B.S. Grewal, “Higher Engineering Mathematics”, Khanna Publications, 43rd Edition, 2015. 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1 David C. Lay, “Linear Algebra and Its Applications”, Pearson Education, Inc., 5th edition, 2016. 
2 Gilbert Strang, “Introduction to Linear Algebra”, Wellesley-Cambridge Press, 5th edition, 2016 
3 J.W. Brown and R.V. Churchill,  “Fourier Series and Boundary Value Problems”, McGraw -
Hill Education,  8th Edition, 2011 
4 Gilbert Strang “Linear Algebra for everyone” 2020,PHI 
5 J R Hanna, J H Rowland, Fourier Series, Transforms and Boundary Value Problems, Dover, 2018 
E Books / MOOCs/ NPTEL  
1 https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111101115 
2 https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/111/106/111106135/ 
3 https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc24_ma21/preview 
 
 
  

=== PAGE 91 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 79   
MATERIALS CHEMISTRY FOR DEVICES AND E-WASTE MANAGEMENT  
(EE/EC/ACT/VLSI and All IT branches) 
 
Course Code:  26CHY104 Course Type: BSC 
Teaching Hours/Week (L: T:P: S):  3:0:2:0 Credits: 04 
Total Teaching Hours: 45+0+30 CIE + SEE Marks: 60+40 
 
Teaching Department: Chemistry 
Course Learning Objectives: 
 
1. To explain the principles and applications of various electrodes and energy systems, including batteries 
and solar cells, in sustainable technologies 
2. To explore corrosion mechanisms and control methods, alongside metal finishing processes such as 
electroplating and electroless plating 
3. To understand the principles and applications of sensors, memory devices, and advanced display 
systems in modern engineering 
4. To examine the synthesis, properties, and applications of polymers and nanomaterials in engineering 
5. To learn the principles of green chemistry and e-waste management, emphasizing sustainable practices 
in engineering applications. 
 
UNIT-I 
ELECTRODES AND ENERGY SYSTEMS 09 Hours 
Electrodes: Introduction, types of electrodes; Reference electrode - introduction, Calomel electrode – 
construction, working, advantages and applications; Concentration cell – definition, construction, working, 
and numerical problems; Ion selective electrode – introduction, glass electrode - construction, working and 
advantages of glass electrode, determination of pH using glass electrode, Concentration cell – definition, 
construction, working, and numerical problems;   
Energy Systems: Introduction to batteries; classification of batteries; construction, working and applications 
of Li-ion battery; Flow battery – introduction, construction, working and applications of vanadium redox flow 
battery; Construction, working and applications of solar photovolta ic cell, advantages and disadvantages; 
synthesis of solar grade silicon by union carbide method 
UNIT II 
CORROSION SCIENCE AND METAL FINISHING 09 Hours 
Corrosion Science: Introduction; electrochemical theory of corrosion (taking Fe as example), corrosion types 
– differential metal corrosion, differential aeration corrosion, pitting corrosion;  factors affecting corrosion – 
primary and secondary factors; corrosion penetration rate – numerical problems; corrosion control – metal 
coating (galvanization and tinning), anodization, sacrificial anode method, 
Metal Finishing:  Introduction; electroplating – definition, principle, factors affecting electroplating,  
electroplating of chromium (hard chromium and decorative chromium) ; electroless plating – definition, 
advantages, application of electroless plating of copper in the manufacture of PCB; comparison between 
electroplating and electroless plating                                                                                                               
UNIT-III 
ANALYTICAL TECHNIUQES, MEMORY DEVICES AND DISPLAY SYSTEMS 09 Hours 
Analytical technique and sensors:  Conductometry- principle, instrumentation, conductometric titration of strong acid 
and acid mixture;  Potentiometry-  principle, instrumentation and application of potentiometry in the estimation of iron; 
determination of pKa of weak acid,  Colorimetry -  principle (Beer Lambert’s law), instrumentation and application in  
determination of Cu/Fe; Electrochemical sensors – introduction, construction and working of electrochemical sensors 
for detection oxides of sulphur (Industry), diclofenac (medicine); disposable sensors and their advantages 

=== PAGE 92 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 80   
 
Memory Devices: Introduction; basic concepts of electronic memory; classification of electronic memory devices; types 
of organic memory devices (organic molecules, polymeric materials, organic-inorganic hybrid materials) 
Display Systems: Liquid crystals (LCs) – introduction; classification of LCs and types of mesophases; electro -optic 
effect; Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) unit – construction and application in numerical display; characteristics, working 
and applications of organic light emitting diode (OLED) and quantum light emitting diode (QLED).                                                                  
UNIT IV 
POLYMERS AND NANOMATERIALS 09 Hours 
Polymers: Introduction; classification based on origin, structure, methods of polymerization, response to heat; 
Molecular weight of polymers: number average molecular weight, weight average molecular weight and poly dispersion 
index (PDI) - numerical problems;; Polymer composites – introduction, synthesis, properties and applications of carbon 
fiber; Conducting polymers – introduction,   conducting mechanism of polyacetylene by oxidative and reductive 
doping, applications of conducting polymers. 
Nanomaterials: Introduction; classification based on dimension; cat alytic and thermal properties of nanoparticles; 
synthesis of nanomaterials by top -down approach (photolithography) and bottom -up approach (sol -gel method); 
synthesis by CVD technique                               
UNIT-V 
E-WASTE MANAGEMENT  09 Hours 
E-waste management: Introduction; sources of e -waste; composition, characteristics and need of e -waste 
management; health hazards due to exposure to e-waste; heavy metals present in the E-waste and their ill effect 
on health a nd environment. Extraction of metals from e -waste- Pretreatment, Pyrometallurgy - smelting, 
combustion, incineration and pyrolysis. Hydrometallurgy- Use of different leaching agents in metal extraction, 
Metal recovery- Use of solvents, adsorption, ion exchange and electrodeposition, extraction of gold and copper 
from e -waste. . Role of stakeholders in environmental management of e -waste (producers, consumers, 
recyclers, and statutory bodies). 
List of Experiments (Any ten)  
1.  Determination of strength of an acid in Pb-acid battery. 
2.  Determination of Total Hardness of a sample of water using disodium salt of EDTA. 
3.  Estimation of iron in TMT bar by diphenylamine/external indicator method. 
4.  Conductometric estimation of strong acid/weak acid with standard NaOH solution.  
5.  Conductometric estimation of acid mixture with standard NaOH solution. 
6.  Potentiometric estimation of FAS using standard K2Cr2O7 solution. 
7.  Determination of pKa of vinegar using pH sensor (Glass electrode). 
8.  Determination of the viscosity coefficient of a given liquid using Ostwald’s viscometer. 
9.  Estimation of Copper present in electroplating effluent by optical sensor (colorimetry). 
10.  Colorimetric determination of iron. 
11.  Estimation of Sodium present in soil/effluent sample using a flame photometer. 
12.  Synthesis of biodiesel (Demonstration). 
13.  Synthesis of Iron-oxide Nanoparticles (Demonstration). 
14.  Synthesis of polyurethane (Demonstration). 
  

=== PAGE 93 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 81   
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course students will be able to 
 
1 Apply the principles, types, and applications of various electrodes and energy systems, such as batteries 
and solar cells, in promoting sustainability in engineering 
2 Apply corrosion control techniques, including metal finishing methods like electroplating and 
electroless plating, in real-world engineering contexts. 
3 Analyze the principles and evaluate the applications of sensors, memory devices, and display systems 
in modern engineering technologies. 
4 Analyze the synthesis, properties, and practical applications of polymers and nanomaterials in various 
engineering fields. 
5 Apply the principles of green chemistry and assess e-waste management strategies, focusing on 
sustainability and environmental impact in engineering practices. 
 
  
Course Outcomes Mapping with Program Outcomes & PSO 
Program Outcomes→ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 PSO↓ 
↓ Course Outcomes    
26CHY104-1.1 3 1             
26CHY104-1.2 3 2             
26CHY104-1.3 3 2             
26CHY104-1.4 2 1             
26CHY104-1.5 2 1             
1: Low 2: Medium 3: High 
TEXTBOOKS: 
1 Engineering Chemistry by P.C. Jain & Monica Jain., Dhanpat Rai Publications, New Delhi.2015. 
2 A Textbook of Engineering Chemistry, R. V. Gadag and Nityananda Shetty, I. K. 
International Publishing house. 2nd Edition, 2016. 
3 A Textbook of Engineering Chemistry, SS Dara &Dr. SS Umare, S. Chand & Company Ltd., 12th 
Edition, 2011. 
  
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1 Wiley Engineering Chemistry, Wiley India Pvt. Ltd. New Delhi, 2013-2ndEdition. 
2 Engineering Chemistry, Satya Prakash &Manisha Agrawal, Khanna Book Publishing, Delhi. 
3 Essentials of Physical Chemistry, Bahl & Tuli, S. Chand Publishing. 
4 Applied Chemistry, Sunita Rattan, Kataria 5. Engineering Chemistry, Baskar, Wiley. 
5 Engineering Chemistry – I, D. Grour Krishana, Vikas Publishing. 
6 Textbook of Polymer Science, F.W. Billmeyer, John Wiley & Sons,4th Edition, 1999. 
7 Nanotechnology A Chemical Approach to Nanomaterials, G.A. Ozin & A.C. Arsenault, RSC 
Publishing, 2005. 
8 Linden's Handbook of Batteries, Kirby W. Beard, Fifth Edition, Mc GrawHill,2019. 
9 OLED Display Fundamentals and Applications, Takatoshi Tsujimura, Wiley–Blackwell,2012 
10 Supercapacitors: Materials, Systems, and Applications, Max Lu, Francois Beguin, Elzbieta 
Frackowiak, Wiley-VCH;1stedition,2013. 
11 Handbook on Electroplating with Manufacture of Electro-chemicals”, ASIAPACIFIC BUSINESS 
PRESS Inc., 2017. Dr. H. Panda. 
12 Laboratory manual in Engineering Chemistry Sudharani, Dhanpat Rai Publishing Company, New 
Delhi. 

=== PAGE 94 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 82   
13 Expanding the Vision of Sensor Materials. National Research Council 1995, Washington, DC: The 
National Academies Press. doi:10.17226/4782. 
14 Engineering Chemistry, Edited by Dr. Mahesh B and Dr. Roopa Shree B, Sunstar Publisher, 
Bengaluru, ISBN978-93-85155-70-3, 2022. 
15 High-Performance Metallic Materials for Cost-Sensitive Applications, F.H. Froes, et al. John Wiley 
& Sons, 2010. 
16 Instrumental Methods of Analysis, Dr. K. R. Mahadik, and Dr. L. Satyanarayana, Nirali Prakashan, 
2020. 
17 Principles of Instrumental Analysis, Douglas A. Skoog, F. James Holler, Stanley R. Crouch Seventh 
Edition, Cengage Learning, 2020. 
18 Polymer Science, VR Gowariker, N V Viswanathan, Jayadev, Sreedhar, New Age Int. Publishers, 
4th Edition, 2021. 
19 Nanostructure materials and nanotechnology, Hari Singh, Nalwa, academic press, 1st edition, 2002. 
20 “Engineering Chemistry”, O. G. Palanna, Tata Mc Graw Hill Education Pvt. Ltd. New Delhi, Fourth 
Reprint, 2015. 
E-Books / MOOCs/ NPTEL 
1 http://libgen.rs/ • https://nptel.ac.in/downloads/122101001/ 
2 https://nptel.ac.in/courses/104/103/104103019/ • https://ndl.iitkgp.ac.in/. 
3 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=faESCxAWR9k 
 
 
 
  

=== PAGE 95 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 83   
APPLIED DIGITAL LOGIC DESIGN 
 
Course Code:  26ECE101 Course Type: ESC 
Teaching Hours/Week (L: T:P: S):  2-0-2-0 Credits: 3 
Total Teaching Hours: 30+15 CIE + SEE Marks: 60+40 
 
Teaching Department: Electronics and Communication Engineering/Allied Branches 
Course Objectives: 
 
1 To enable students to understand and simulate fundamental concepts of digital electronics including 
number systems, binary arithmetic, logic gates, and Boolean algebra. 
2 To introduce methods for simplifying Boolean expressions and verifying them through simulation 
using basic logic gates. 
3 To equip students with the knowledge and simulation skills to analyze and design combinational logic 
circuits. 
4 To provide students with an understanding of flip -flops and their simulation for sequential circuit 
behavior. 
5 To enable students to apply flip -flops in the design and simulation of sequential circuits such as shift 
registers and counters. 
 
UNIT-I 
Fundamentals of Digital Design  06 Hours 
Difference between Analog and Digital Signals, Number Systems: Decimal, Binary, Octal and Hexadecimal. 
Binary Addition and Subtraction, Digital Logic Gates, Boolean Algebra, Boolean Functions: Canonical Forms, 
Completely and Incompletely Specified Functions 
T1 - Chapter 1.-1.2, Chapter 2.-2.1, 2.2, 2.3.1, 2.3.2, 2.4, 2.5, 2.8 Chapter 3. -3.1 - 3.5, 3.7, 3.8, 3.9.1, 3.9.2, 
3.9.6, 3.9.7 
UNIT-II 
Simplification of Boolean expressions  06 Hours 
Simplification of Boolean Functions using Boolean Algebra, Karnaugh Maps, Quine -McCluskey (up to four 
variables), Realization of Boolean functions using Basic Gates 
T1 - Chapter 4.- 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.8 
UNIT-III 
Combinational Logic Circuits  06 Hours 
Introduction to Combinational Logic Circuits, Half/Full Adders/Subtractors, Parallel Adders/Subtractors, 
Binary Comparators, Decoders, Encoders, Multiplexers. 
T1: chapter 5.- 5.1, 5.1.1, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 5.6 
UNIT-IV 
Sequential Logic Circuits 06 Hours 
Basic Bistable Element, SR Flip -Flop, D Flip Flop, JK Flip Flop, T Flip Flop, Master Slave JK Flip Flop, 
Characteristic Equations, Conversion of Flip Flops. 
T1: chapter 6- 6.1, 6.2, 6.4.2, 6.6 
UNIT-V 
Applications of Flip Flops 06 Hours 
Design of Shift Register using D - flip flop, Design of Counters: Asynchronous counters using T -flip flop, 
Synchronous Counters using D-flip flop and T Flip Flop. 
T1: chapter 6- 6.7, 6.8.1, 6.9 
List of Experiments  
(Use this section wherever applicable, else delete this section) 
1.  Introduction to Simulation tool 
2.  Simulation of Basic Logic Gates and Binary Arithmetic Operations 
3.  Simulation and Verification of Simplified Boolean Functions using K-Map and Logic Gates 

=== PAGE 96 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 84   
4.  Simulation and verification of a Half Adder and Full adder 
5.  Simulation and verification of a Half subtractor and Full subtractor 
6.  Simulation and verification of a Binary Adder and Multiplexer Circuit 
7.  Simulation and verification of  D,T,SR and JK Flip-Flops 
8.  Simulation of Flip-Flops and Conversion Between Flip-Flop Types 
9.  Simulation of 4-bit Shift Register and Asynchronous Counters 
10.  Simulation of 4-bit Shift Register and Synchronous Counters 
 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course student will be able to: 
 
1 Demonstrate binary operations, convert between number systems, and simulate basic digital logic 
circuits using Boolean functions. 
2 Simplify Boolean functions using Boolean algebra, Karnaugh maps, and the Quine -McCluskey 
method, and simulate the implementation using basic logic gates. 
3 Design and simulate combinational circuits such as adders, subtractors, comparators, decoders, 
encoders, and multiplexers. 
4 Describe, simulate, and analyze various flip -flops, perform conversions, and determine their 
characteristic equations. 
5 Design and simulate shift registers and both asynchronous and synchronous counters using 
appropriate flip-flops. 
 
  
Course Outcomes Mapping with Program Outcomes & PSO 
 
Program Outcomes→ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 PSO↓ 
↓ Course Outcomes 1 2  
26ECE101.1 3 2 2  3       3 2  
26ECE101.2 3 2 3  3       3 2  
26ECE101.3 3 2 3  3       3 3  
26ECE101.4 3 2 2  3       3 2  
26ECE101.5 3 2 3  3       3 3  
1: Low 2: Medium 3: High 
TEXTBOOKS: 
1 Digital Principles and Design, Donald D. Givone, McGraw Hill, ,2002 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1 Digital Design, Morris Mano, Prentice Hall of India, 3rd Edition 
2 Digital Logic Applications and Design, John M Yarbrough, Thomson Learning,2001 
3 D. P. Kothari and J. S Dhillon, Pearson,2016 
4 Fundamentals of Logic Design, Charles H Roth, Cengage Learning 
E Books / MOOCs/ NPTEL 
1 https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117106086 
 
 
 
 
  

=== PAGE 97 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 85   
ELEMENTS OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING 
Course Code 26EEE102 Course Type ESC 
Hours/Week (L:T:P:S) 3:0:0:0 Credits 3 
Total Teaching Hours 45+0+0 CIE + SEE Marks 60+40 
PREREQUISITE:   
Course Objectives  
1.  To understand fundamental electrical laws and apply graph theory to analyze electrical circuits. 
2.  To analyze single-phase AC circuits and calculate power and power factor. 
3.  To understand conventional and non -conventional power generation and basics of power 
transmission. 
4.  To explain power distribution systems and principles of DC-DC converters. 
5.  To understand the fundamentals of electrical machines, protection devices and power supply 
systems 
Course Contents 
UNIT – 1  9 Hours 
Graph Theory in Electrical Circuits 
Ohm’s law, Kirchhoff Laws (KVL, KCL). 
Graph Representation: Nodes, Branches, Linear graph of a network, Tie set and Cut-set Matrix, 
Incidence Matrix, Analysis of resistive network using cut-set and tie-set 
UNIT – 2 9 Hours 
Analysis of AC Circuits  
Instantaneous values, RMS values, Average values, Form factor, Peak factor. 
Single-phase AC Circuits: R, L, C, RL, RC, RLC Circuits, Power Factor, Power 
UNIT - 3 9 Hours 
Introduction to Power System 
Energy Sources (Conventional -Hydro, Nuclear, Thermal, Hydroelectric power plants & Non-
conventional- Solar, Wind, Tidal), Basic power plant components, Voltage levels in generation 
Transmission System Overview (HVAC & HVDC), Transmission Voltage Levels (Low, Medium, 
High, Extra High Voltage) 
Overview of Power Distribution 
Primary & Secondary Distribution, Distribution Voltage Levels (415V, 230V) 
UNIT - 4 9 Hours 
Introduction to DC-DC Conversion 
Working principle and application of Buck Converter, Boost Converter, Uninterruptible Power Supply 
(UPS)- Block Diagram & Working 
Electric Vehicles (EV) 
Fundamentals, Block diagram of EV and its components, Motors used in EV 
UNIT - 5 9 Hours 
Overview of Electrical Machines, Protective Devices 
Magnetic Circuits Concepts, dot convention, Transformers -Working Principle, Types, Applications 
Electrical Machines: DC Motor, Stepper Motor - working principle and applications 
Protective devices-Fuse, MCB 
Earthing – Necessity, Types, Ground and neutral concept 
 
 
  

=== PAGE 98 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 86   
Course Outcomes 
At the end of the course student will be able to 
1.  Analyze resistive electrical circuits using graph theory and Kirchhoff laws. 
2.  Solve single-phase AC circuits and evaluate power quantities. 
3.  Identify and differentiate among various energy sources and explain the structure of the power 
system. 
4.  Explain the working of DC-DC converters and components used in Electric Vehicle. 
5.  Describe the working principles of transformers, electrical machines, protective devices. 
Course Outcomes Mapping with Program Outcomes & PSO 
 
Program Outcomes→ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 
↓ Course Outcomes 
26EEE102.1 3 2      1 1   
26EEE102.2 3 2      1 1   
26EEE102.3 3 2      1 1   
26EEE102.4 3 2      1 1   
26EEE102.5 3 2      1 1   
1: Low 2: Medium 3: High 
 
TEXTBOOKS 
1. Electrical Technology, Hughes Edward, Pearson Education Publications, 10th Ed, 2010 
2. Electrical Power Systems, C.L.Wadhwa, New Age International, 7th Ed, 2016 
3. Power Electronics: Circuits, Devices and Applications, Muhammad H. Rashid, 4th Editon, 2017 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS 
1. Basic Electrical Engineering, D.P. Kothari and I.J. Nagrathm, McGraw Hill Education, 4th Ed, 2019 
2. 500 Solutions of Problems in Electrical Engineering Part I, Parker Smith, CBS, 2003 
 
  

=== PAGE 99 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 87   
INTRODUCTION TO PYTHON PROGRAMMING 
 
Course Code:  26CSE102 Course Type: PLC 
Teaching Hours/Week (L:T:P:J:SL)  2:0:2:0:1 Credits: 3 
Total Teaching Hours: 30:0:30:0:15 CIE + SEE Marks: 60+40 
 
Teaching Department: Any 
Course Objectives: 
 
1 Understand basic Python programming constructs. 
2 Develop modular programs using Python functions. 
3 Utilize Python data structures. 
4 Perform file operations and apply object-oriented programming. 
5 Handle exceptions and visualize data. 
 
UNIT-I 
Introduction to Python Programming 6 Hours 
Python Concepts: Introduction to Python, Variables, Keywords, Identifiers, Literals, Comments, Operators 
Control and Looping statements: if, if-else, elif, nested if, for, while, break, continue, pass 
UNIT-II 
Functions and Modular Programming 6 Hours 
Design with functions : Functions Overview, Arguments and return values, Formal vs Actual arguments, 
Named arguments, Recursive Functions, Lambda Functions, Modules 
UNIT-III 
Data Structures in Python 6 Hours 
Data Structures: Strings and basic operations, Lists, Tuples, Sets, Dictionaries: creation and manipulation 
UNIT-IV 
File Handling and Introduction to Object-Oriented Concepts 6 Hours 
Files: Create a file, read and write operations with text and CSV files 
Object Oriented Concepts: Class, Object 
UNIT-V 
Exception Handling and Data Visualization 6 Hours 
Exception handling: Introduction to Exceptions and Errors, Handling exceptions using try-except-else-
finally 
Introduction to Pandas: Data analysis and manipulation using Pandas 
Data Visualization using Matplotlib: Plotting different kinds of graphs using Matplotlib 
 
Suggested list of Experiments  
1.  Experiments related to basic operation, data types, and variables. 
2.  Experiments related to control and looping statements. 
3.  Experiments on writing functions and parameter passing. 
4.  Experiments related to the operations of lists, tuples, and dictionaries.  
5.  Experiments related to working with strings. 
6.  Experiments related to file handling. 
7.  Experiments related to classes and objects. 
8.  Experiments related to exception handling. 
9.  Experiments related to data analysis and manipulation using Pandas. 
10.  Experiments related to plotting graphs using Matplotlib. 
 
  

=== PAGE 100 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 88   
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course student will be able to: 
1 Apply core Python programming concepts such as variables, operators, and control flow to develop 
interactive programs. 
2 Design and implement reusable code using functions and modules to solve real-world computational 
problems. 
3 Manipulate and process data effectively using built-in Python data structures like strings, lists, tuples, 
sets, and dictionaries. 
4 Demonstrate the ability to manage files and implement object-oriented principles such as classes and 
objects in Python. 
5 Develop robust Python applications with exception handling and use data analysis and visualization 
tools like Pandas and Matplotlib. 
 
  
Course Outcomes Mapping with Program Outcomes & PSO 
 
Program Outcomes→ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 
↓ Course Outcomes 
26CSE102.1 3 2 - - 1 - 1 - - - 3 
26CSE102.2 3 2 - - 1 - 1 - - - 3 
26CSE102.3 3 2 - - 1 - 1 - - - 3 
26CSE102.4 3 2 - - 1 - 1 - - - 3 
26CSE102.5 3 2 - - 1 - 1 - - - 3 
1: Low 2: Medium 3: High 
TEXTBOOKS: 
1 Kenneth A. Lambert, “ ―The Fundamentals of Python: First Programs‖, Cengage  Learning, 3 rd 
Edition, 2023. 
2 Yashwanth Kanetkar, Adithya Kanetkar, ―Let us Python‖, 6th Edition, 2023. 
3 Al Sweigart, “Automate the Boring Stuff with Python”, 1 st Edition, No Starch Press, 
2015. 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1 Mark Summerfield, “Programming in Python 3 - A Complete Introduction to the Python Language”, 
Second Edition, Addison-Wesley, 2009. 
2 Y. Daniel Liang, “Introduction to Programming Using Python”, Pearson, 2018. 
E Books / MOOCs/ NPTEL 
1 https://assets.openstax.org/oscms-
prodcms/media/documents/Introduction_to_Python_Programming_-_WEB.pdf 
2 https://baou.edu.in/assets/pdf/BSCIT_405_slm.pdf 
3 https://www.iimchyderabad.com/Material/introduction-to-python-programming.pdf 
4 https://cfm.ehu.es/ricardo/docs/python/Learning_Python.pdf 
 
 
 
  

=== PAGE 101 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 89   
 
COMMUNICATIVE ENGLISH 
 
Course Code 26HSS131 Course Type AEC 
Teaching Hours/Week (L:T:P:S) 1:0:2:0 Credits 02 
Total Teaching Hours 15+0+30 CIE + SEE Marks 60+40 
 
Teaching Department: Humanities 
Course Objectives: 
 
1. Develop proficiency in phonetics, pronunciation, and effective oral communication. 
2. Strengthen foundational grammar and language skills. 
3. Improve academic writing skills for various contexts by appreciating texts. 
4. Enhance comprehension and analytical thinking through the skill of writing 
 
 
Unit – I 
Phonetics & Communication  15 Hours 
● Introduction to Phonetics, IPA, stress, rhythm, and intonation. 
● Rhythm, Intonation, Past Tense and Plural Pronunciation, Awareness of Accents 
● Fundamentals of Communication, Barriers, Strategies, Requests and Permissions. 
● Verbal and Non-Verbal Communication, Telephone etiquette, greetings, requests. 
● Short Formal Speech 
Practical Activities:  
● Phonetic drills, speech exercises, interactive speaking activities. 
● Communication and telephone conversation simulations 
Unit – II 
Language Skills & Grammar  15 Hours 
● Texts – Prose & Poetry 
● Grammar Essentials: Prepositions, Articles, Sentence structure. 
● Language Skills: Sentence construction, comprehension, and structured writing techniques. 
● Comprehension 
Practical Activities:  
● Grammar exercises, sentence correction, editing tasks. 
● Reading comprehension exercises and discussion-based learning 
Unit – III 
Writing Skills  15 Hours 
● Cohesive Devices: Conjunctions, linkers, and sequence of ideas in writing. 
● Writing Skills: Paragraph development, linkers, structured writing. 
● Argumentation and Refutation 
● Application Letter 
Practical Activities:  
● Writing focused on clarity, coherence, and structure. 
 
  

=== PAGE 102 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 90   
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course students will be able to 
 
1. Identify the nuances of phonetics, intonation, and pronunciation to appreciate and incorporate 
Received Pronunciation  
2. Interpret and assess nuances of oral communication skills and non-verbal communication for 
professional usage  
  
3. Identify, interpret, and describe the critical ideas, values, and themes to appreciate literary pieces 
for its language and social interpretations  
4. Implement English vocabulary in both personal and professional contexts, enhancing language 
proficiency while also honing effective writing skills adaptable to various forms of written 
communication. 
 
  
Course Outcomes Mapping with Program Outcomes & PSO 
 
Program Outcomes→ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 PSO↓ 
↓ Course Outcomes 1 2 
26HSS131.1 1 1     2  2  3   
26HSS131.2 2     2   3  3   
26HSS131.3  2    3 2  3  3   
26HSS131.4  2    2  2 2  2   
1: Low 2: Medium 3: High 
TEXT BOOK 
1. Tidings, Victor, R. et al. (2022). A Textbook of English Language & Communication Skills. 
 
REFERENCES 
1. Jones, D (2011). English Pronunciation Dictionary. 
2. Woods (2016). A Remedial English Grammar for Foreign Students. 
3. Kumar, S. (2011). Communication Skills. Oxford University Press. 
4. CIEFL, Hyderabad (Year). Exercises in Spoken English Part I. Oxford University Press. 
5. CIEFL, Hyderabad (Year). Exercises in Spoken English Part II. Oxford University Press. 
6. CIEFL, Hyderabad (Year). Exercises in Spoken English Part III. Oxford University Press. 
7. Zinsser, W. (1976). On Writing Well. 
8. Swan (2014). Practical English Usage. Oxford University Press. 
9. Lyons, L. H. (2006). Study Writing. Cambridge University Press. 
10. Subhashini, Victor, R. et al. (2022). A Textbook of English Language & Communication Skills. 
 
E Resources 
1. https://www.macmillandictionary.com/dictionary/british/ 
 
 
 
 
 
  

=== PAGE 103 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 91   
MATHEMATICS WITH MATLAB 
 
Course Code:   26MAT107 Course Type: BSC 
Teaching Hours/Week (L-T-P):  0-0-2 Credits: 01 
Total Teaching Hours: 0+0+26 CIE + SEE Marks: 60+00 
    
 
Teaching Department: Mathematics 
Course Objectives: 
This course will enable the students to learn to use MATLAB for basic operations, array handling, plotting, 
and solving problems using symbolic and numerical methods. 
 
List of Experiments 
1. Introduction to MATLAB: Basic Operators: Arithmetic, Logical and Relational Operators. Elementary 
math functions such as algebraic, trigonometric, logarithmic, exponential functions, Conditions and 
Loops. 
2. Symbolic Computation, plotting curves, surfaces and vector fields. 
3. Computation of angle between (a) radius vector and tangent (b) two curves 
4.  Computation of radius of curvature 
5. Taylor’s/ Maclaurin’s series expansion of a function of a single variable.  
6. Differentiation of composite and computation of partial derivatives. 
7. Computation of Jacobian.  
8. Computation of extreme values of multivariate functions. 
9. Solution of first -order ordinary differential equation and second and higher -order linear differential 
equation with constant coefficients 
10. Evaluation of double/triple integrals with constant/variable limits. 
 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course student will be able to 
1 
Introduction to MATLAB: Basic Operators: Arithmetic, Logical and Relational Operators. Elementary 
math functions such as algebraic, trigonometric, logarithmic, exponential functions, Cond itions and 
Loops. 
2 Symbolic Computation, plotting curves, surfaces and vector fields. 
  
 
Course Outcomes Mapping with Program Outcomes & PSO 
 
Program Outcomes→ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 PSO↓ 
↓ Course Outcomes    
26MAT107.1 3 2 - - - - - - - - - - - - 
26MAT107.2 2 2 - - - - - - - - - - - - 
26MAT107.3 3 2 - - - - - - - - - - - - 
26MAT107.4 3 2 - - - - - - - - - - - - 
26MAT107.5 3 2 - - - - - - - - - - - - 
1: Low 2: Medium 3: High 
 

=== PAGE 104 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 92   
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1 Rudra Pratap, “MATLAB”, OXFORD University press, 2010 
2 Dorothy C. Attaway Ph.D., A practical introduction to prog. And problem solving, 5th edition 
E Books / MOOCs/ NPTEL 
1 https://www.mathworks.com › matlab › matlab_prog 
2 https://www.coursera.org/specializations/mathematics-engineers 
3 https://www.coursera.org/specializations/matlab-programming-engineers-scientists 
4 https://www.coursera.org/learn/matlab 
 
 
  

=== PAGE 105 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 93   
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA & GLOBAL CITIZENSHIP 
 
Course Code 26HSS101 Course Type HSMC 
Teaching Hours/Week (L: T:P:S) 01:0:0:0 Credits 01 
Total Teaching Hours 15+0+0 CIE + SEE Marks 60 + 00 
 
Teaching Department: Humanities 
Course Objectives: 
 
1. To Understand the Obligations, Responsibilities, Privileges and Rights, Duties and the Role that 
they have to play in deciding the Administrative Machinery of the nation as citizens. 
2. To empower learners to become aware of and understand global issues and to become active 
promoters of more peaceful, tolerant, inclusive, secure, and sustainable societies. 
 
 
UNIT - I 
Evolution of the Indian Constitution                                                                                  05 Hours 
Cabinet Mission Plan of 1946 – Partition Plan of 1947 and Indian Independence Act 1947, Constituent 
Assembly and Committees – Drafting, Enactment and Enforcement of Indian Constitution, Basic structure 
of Indian Constitution, Salient Features of Indian Constitution, Fundamental Rights, Fundamental Duties. 
Separation of Powers (Organs of the Constitution)                                03 Hours 
Executive:  Union and State  
Legislature: Union and State  
Indian Judicial System  
UNIT - II 
Structure of Government                                                                                                     04 Hours 
Union: Prime Minister, Council of Ministers 
State: Chief Minister, Council of Ministers  
Local Self-Governance: Panchayat Raj Institutions, Urban Governance 
 
Global Citizenship                                                                                                                03 Hours 
Meaning of Global Citizenship – ‘VasudhaivaKutumbakam, Types of Global Citizenship, Globalization and 
Interconnectedness, Characteristics/Attributes of a Global Citizen, Rights of Global Citizenship, 
Responsibilities of a Global Citizen, Ethical Dimensions and Sustainability practices. 
 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course, student will be able to 
 
1. Analyze the legalities and related issues of Indian Constitution as a fundamental law of the nation 
and the rights and duties of Indian Citizen. 
2. Become a responsible citizen being interconnected; has knowledge about his/her role in the 
community, State and the country; has a role in making the world a better place to live by applying 
critical thinking and ethical reasoning. 
 
  
Course Outcomes Mapping with Program Outcomes & PSO 
 
Program Outcomes→ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 PSO↓ 
↓ Course Outcomes 1 2 

=== PAGE 106 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 94   
26HSS101.1 - - - - - 3 2 - - - 2 - - 
26HSS101.2 - - - - - 3 2 1 1  2 - - 
1: Low 2: Medium 3: High 
 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS 
1 Basu, D.D., “Introduction to the Constitution of India”, Twentieth Edition, Reprint 2011. LexisNexis 
Butterworths Wadhwa, Nagpur, Haryana, India, 2011. 
2 Pylee, M.V. “Introduction to Constitution of India”, Fourth Revised Edition. Vikas Publishing House 
Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 2005. 
3 Sharma, B.K. “Introduction to Constitution of India”, Second Edition. Prentice Hall of India Pvt. Ltd., 
New Delhi, 2004. 
4 Venkatesh, B.R. &Merunandan, K.B., “An Introduction to Constitution of India and Professional 
Ethics”, Second Edition. Merugu Publications, Bangalore, 2007. 
5 United Nations. "The Sustainable Development Goals Report." 
6 UNESCO. (2015). "Global Citizenship Education: Topics and Learning Objectives." 
7 Amartya Sen. (1999). "Development as Freedom." 
8 Martha Nussbaum. (2011). "Creating Capabilities: The Human Development Approach." 
9 Martha Nussbaum, Cultivating Humanity: A Classical Defense of Reform in Liberal Education 
E Resources 
1 NPTEL course: "Constitution of India". http://nptel.ac.in/courses/109104032/ 
2 "Constitution of India" eBook. https://pothi.com/pothi/book/ebook-ministry-law-and-justice-
constitution-india. 
3 iasplanner.blogspot.com/2010/11/free-ebook-download-constitution-of.html 
4 www.iasabhiyan.com 
5 Samvidhaan, Documentary by Prasaar Bharathi 
6 http://en.unesco.org/gced 
7 https://www.theglobalcitizensinitiative.org/the-rights-and-responsibilities-of-global-citizenship/ 
8 https://www.un.org/en/academic-impact/global-citizenship 
9 UN Sustainable Development Goals: https://sdgs.un.org/ 
10 UNESCO Global Citizenship Education: https://en.unesco.org/themes/gced 
 
 
 
  

=== PAGE 107 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 95   
KNOWING YOURSELF 
 
 Course Code 26HSS132 Course Type Ability Enhancement 
Course 
 
 Teaching Hours/Week (L: T: P: S) 1:0:0:0 Credits 1  
 Total Teaching Hours 15+0+0 CIE + SEE Marks 60+00  
Teaching Department: Centre For Flourish 
Course Objectives: 
 
 1. The course would support students to identify their strengths and work on the areas of improvement  
 2. The course will enable students to self reflect on their life goals and plan their action plan to attain 
them 
 
 
Unit - I 
SELF AWARENESS EXERCISES 
1. Ice breaker: Who am I? -to reflect on covert and overt attributes 
2. Tree of Life exercise- to reflect on their life wholistically 
3. Johari Window: -to identify and map interests, capacities and competencies; Reflections on 
personal strengths and identifying areas of improvement. 
 
 
7 
 
Unit – II 
BEING A BETTER VERSION OF MYSELF 
1. Goal setting exercises: Short term and long term personal and professional goal setting; 
Reviewing the set goals and identifying immediate actionable steps to be taken. 
2. Identifying sources of distractions: action plan to manage and self-monitor 
3. Time management strategies: Dealing with procrastination; reducing screentime 
 
 
8 
 
 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course student will be able to 
 
1. The student will be able to reflect on their strengths and capacities 
2. Identify their areas of improvement 
3. Set and submit short term and longterm professional and personal goals 
4 Identify and manage their distractions  
 Program Outcomes→ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 
0 
1 
1 
 PSO↓  
↓ Course Outcomes 1 2 
26HSS132.1      1     3    
26HSS132.2      1     3    
26HSS132.3   2        3    
26HSS132.4   2        3    
1: Low 2: Medium 3: High 
 
  

=== PAGE 108 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 96   
REFERENCE MATERIALS: 
1. Eurich, T. (2017). Insight: why we're not as self-aware as we think, and how seeing ourselves clearly 
helps us succeed at work and in life. New York, Crown Business. 
2. Seligman, M. E. P. (2011). Flourish: A visionary new understanding of happiness and well-being. Free 
Press. 
3. American Psychological Association. The Psychology of Procrastination: Why People Put Off 
Important Tasks Until the Last Minute. 2010. 
4. A psychological perspective: https://www.verywellmind.com/what-is-selfawareness- 
2795023#toc-how-does-self-awarenessdevelop 
5. Procrastination https://jamesclear.com/procrastination 
 
  

=== PAGE 109 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 97   
Pathways to Success 
 Course Code 26HSS133 Course Type Ability Enhancement 
Course 
 
 Teaching Hours/Week (L: T: P: S) 1:0:0:0 Credits 1  
 Total Teaching Hours 15+0+0 CIE + SEE Marks 60+00  
Teaching Department: Centre For Flourish 
Course Objectives: 
 
 1. The course would enablestudents to reflect and identify factors that are the building blocks to success  
 2. The course would provide an opportunity to students to draw up an action plan and practice good 
habits. 
 
 
Unit - I 
NON-COGNITIVE FACTORS FOR SUCCESS 
1. Case studies: What habits are necessary to attain and sustain success? 
2. Growth mindset or Fixed mindset? Assess yourself-analyze your self-talk. 
3. Self-reflection: Review personal habits-action plan to develop and practice good habits 
 
 
7 
 
Unit – II 
BEING A BETTER VERSION OF MYSELF 
1. Case studies: People who failed to succeed 
2. Social Lab: Talk to people- life lessons- grit and resilience. 
3. Self-reflection: How do I deal with setbacks and failures? - Do’s and Don’ts 
4. Mindfulness practice 
 
 
8 
 
 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course student will be able to 
 
1. Identify the non cognitive factors leading to success 
2. Recognize failure as pathways to success 
3. Recognise the makers of growth mindset in oneself  
4 Practice techniques to build good habits  
 
 
Program Outcomes→ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 
0 
1 
1 
 PSO↓  
↓ Course Outcomes 1 2 
26HSS133.1   2    1    3    
26HSS133.2      2     3    
26HSS133.3   1        3    
26HSS133.4      2 1    3    
1: Low 2: Medium 3: High 
REFERENCE MATERIALS: 
1. Duckworth, A. (2016). Grit: The power of passion and perseverance. Scribner/Simon & Schuster. 
2. Khera, S. (2014) You Can Win: A Step-by-Step Tool for Top Achievers. A&C Black. 

=== PAGE 110 ===

  Regulations and Syllabus for B. Tech. 
           
 
Page | 98   
3. TED talk by Angela Duckworth on grit-- 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H14bBuluwB8&t=111s 
4. 5 Practices of Highly Resilient People with Dr. Taryn Marie Stejskal: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gIYHQAeOy-w 
5. Learning from failure https://hbr.org/2011/04/strategies-for-learning-fromfailure 
6. Carol Dweck on Growth Mindset https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hiiEeMN7vbQ 
 